start question
life-insurance
What does it mean when you have a insurance policy that says cash value 8000 and face value 16000 ?
Generally , whole life and some universal life policies have a cash value as the policy ages . This is the amount of cash available for loan . If you look at a current illustration which can be obtained from the insurance company , you will see that the cash value and surrender value will be the same in later years . The face value is the death benefit which will be paid minus any borrowing of the cash value . If you do decide to borrow , make sure you understand how that will affect the policy and premiums in later years .
The cash value is the amount of money available for you to borrow from . If you would terminate your policy , this would be approximately the amount of cash value you would receive , minus any surrender charges and fees . The face amount of $ 16,000 is the amount your beneficiary would receive if you would pass away .
I just want to point out that it is the cash value that allows the company to pay the death benefit regardless of when it occurs . One way you can look at this is that the company has already accumulated half of the death benefit . They are willing to give you half of the death benefit now rather than wait and pay the death claim later . If there wasnt a cash value , there couldnt be a level death benefit for a level premium .
The face amount of the policy is the monies to be paid out to the beneficiary in the event of the insured 's death during the life of the policy . The cash value inside of the policy is an amount available for the policyowner to borrow from . As per the question , the $ 16,000 is the amount that will be paid to the policy 's beneficiary upon the death of the insured . The $ 8,000 is the cash value - an amount that the policyowner can borrow from while the insured is living . The program at hand is a form of permanent coverage . Permanent life insurance programs have cash value building inside the policies - term insurance does not build cash value . There are two primary types of permanent coverage - universal and whole life . When the policyowner borrows from the cash value , he/she is creating a loan . But with any loan , there is an interest rate attached because you are expected to repay the loan back to the insurance company . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan against the policy , the death benefit paid out will then be the face amount less the outstanding loan value and any remaining interest attached to the loan .
It sounds like you own a whole life or universal life policy , which can get confusing . The face value is the death benefit , in your case $ 160,000 . If you died , your beneficiary would receive $ 160,000 and no more . The $ 8,000 cash value melts to zero value in that case.The cash value isa kind of forced `` sideaccount `` within your life policy that is realized by you only if you surrender the policy or borrow against it , which can then reduce your death benefit by the amount of debt owed.If you need cash , you can borrow against the $ 8,000 and pay interest , but then any indebtedness would be deducted at time of death from the $ 160,000 . $ 160,000 seems like a very low amount of life insurance these days . Most experts recommend 10x your annual income assuming you have debts or people depending upon that income . For example , a healthy 40 year old can buy $ 500,000 worth of 20 year level term life insurance for less than $ 33 per month .
Great question ! The `` face value '' is the amount that would be paid to the beneficiary , minus any loan amounts or unpaid premiums . The `` cash value '' is the amount that could be borrowed or received upon surrender of the policy . The cash value will usually be less than the face value of the policy until very long after you 've had it , in most cases.If you have more questions , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Indemnity insurance is a form of health insurance that pays a fixed amount per service or for a period of time . For example , an indemnity policy might pay $ 50 towards a doctor 's office visit . This means that regardless of the total cost of that visit to the doctor the indemnity policy pays $ 50 . Another common example is the indemnity policy may pay $ 500 per day that the policyholder is in the hospital . If the policy holder had a 2 day hospital stay that cost $ 8000 the policy would pay $ 1000 -LRB- $ 500 x 2 -RRB- and the policy holder would be responsible for the remaining $ 7000 in hospital expenses . There are many variations on the indemnity policy theme and they are often combined with accident and/or critical illness policies to provide more financial protection . In any event , indemnity policies are not major medical policies and by design provide defined and limited financial protection to the policy holder . These policies were really designed more as a supplement to major medical insurance than as a replacement for it . If you have a premature baby that racks up $ 500,000 in neonatal intensive care bills an indemnity policy will not go very far towards covering that expense . Also , indemnity policies do not meet the Minimum Essential Benefit requirements for health insurance under the affordable care act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and will leave such a policyholder subject to the individual mandate tax penalty if that is the only medical insurance a person has . With the high cost of ObamaCare compliant plans the lower costs of hospital indemnity plans can be a tempting option for some people but you should be under no illusion that these policies cover the full range of medical services a person might need or that they provide protection against the costs of serious illnesses or injuries that might run into the 5 , 6 or 7 figure range .
An insurance company will total a car out once the amount of damage reaches a percentage of the vehicle 's market value . Usually this is around 75 % . So for example , if you total a vehicle that is worth $ 8000 , claims adjusters will consider a total when the damage approaches or exceeds $ 6000 .
This debate has been going on for the last century . In theory , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having health insurance ? And , in theory , if everyone was in the insurance risk pool this would be the best way to spread health care costs equally . By the same token , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having good and ample food & water , and everyone needs housing , and everyone needs utilities for their housing , and everyone needs transportation and there is a long list of other needs that we all have . The real question is can a society afford universal health insurance and thus universal health care in the sense that most Americans have become accustomed to getting it ? When you start looking at the economics of health care this becomes much more problematic . Health care is different from most services we consume in that it creates its own growing demand . Who does n't want to live longer , and live healthier during that longer life ? And , as you have probably noticed , we have a continually growing list of parts we can replace , once deadly illnesses we can now manage or cure , and treatments that just improve your `` quality of life '' . All this comes with a price tag and the price just keeps going up . I was born in 1957 for a cost of $ 400 , my son was born in 1987 for a cost of $ 4000 , and today a normal childbirth is easily $ 8000 + . As best as I can tell , babies are born the same way today as they were in 1957 but the cost has far outpaced general inflation levels in the economy as a whole over that time period . The painful reality is that providing universal healthcare in a modern society -LRB- e , g , - North America , Europe -RRB- has not been accomplished without rationing of healthcare services -LRB- however it might be disguised -RRB- . For instance , we have more MRI scanners in Memphis , TN than in all of Canada -LRB- a nation often cited as an example of where universal health insurance is a success -RRB- . Tests that get ordered and conducted on the same day here can have waiting times of months up there . There really is no definitive answer to your question . But it does highlight the gap between theory and reality when trying to address providing health insurance to a population .
The cost of care keeps rising . If you need a nursing home it would not be uncommon to see the cost of care to be $ 7,000 - $ 8000 per month and it is expected to keep increasing . The question becomes if you do n't get a Long Term Care policy what assets are you prepared to liquidate to pay for the care . At $ 7,000 a month for 3 years that comes out to a cost of $ 252,000 based on today 's cost . What will the cost be when you need it in 10 , 20 or 30 years ? We can assume it will be much more . The yearly premium will be only a fraction of the cost if you did n't have a policy . A good Long Term Care policy will include assisted living , home healthcare and nursing home care . The chance of you needing one or all of those at some point in your life is pretty high .
I am sorry for your loss , and pray that you find comfort during this time . You have asked a great question . I 'm going to hazard a guess and say that the policy has been in force for many years . Over that time , the amount paid into the policy has exceeded whatever the face value of the policy is , the company pays the occasional dividend , or both . In any case , the cash value has grown to exceed the stated benefit value of the policy . I have policies that are the same way ; my Dad was wise and loved us enough to buy policies for us with what at the time were adequate face values . Over the years , what I 've paid on the policy has been supplemented by dividends paid by the insurance company . The cash value is about triple the face value . But if you look at the monthly statement , I will bet you will see what I see on mine - the death benefit is equal to the face value + the excess cash value , minus any unpaid loans or owed premium . My bet is the policy is written with a company that has been fiscally prosperous , and paid steady dividends to the policy . Your loved one made a wise decision purchasing this policy . May God bless and keep you in your time of sorrow , and thank you for asking .
The cost of prenatal and delivery will vary greatly by area , level of care needed , etc. . I have several clients in Georgia that have successfully negotiated with the doctor and hospital and set up a prepayment arrangement . A normal vaginal delivery without complications , including prenatal care , can run around $ 8000 to $ 9000 dollars . Add another $ 2000 for scheduled c-section .
If you have assets you want to protect then you should consider Long Term Care Insurance . You have a one in four chance of needing some type of long term care in your lifetime . The average Nursing Home cost is between $ 6000 and $ 8000 per month , Assisted Living is around $ 4000 to $ 5000 per month . Home Health Care is around $ 15 to $ 20 per hour . It will not take long to go through any assets at these rates . Then the option will be Medicaid . If you want to protect your assets then Long Term Care is an excellent way to do so and will be far less expensive in the long run .
Not all home owners policies are created equally ! The cause of loss determines if the damage will be covered by the insurance company . Most home owners policies cover a broad range of covered losses . However , some policies only cover `` named perils '' , like fire , wind or hail . Let 's assume you had the broad range . The cause of loss would be next . If the cause was a slow leaking overtime caused by not fixing a leaky pipe then insurance is not designed to cover that . But , if it was a sudden accidental -LRB- not if you took a baseball bat to it in anger -RRB- breaking of the toilet , it would cover the damage in this case . Usually , the damages in the sudden breakage are severe enough that you would not want to self-insure and fix it yourself . Recently , we had a client have a broken toilet causing water damage . It started out as ~ $ 1000 , but as the plumber got into the repairs & replacing the toilet , the water damage had found under the tile , which turned into about $ 8000 . So , we went from not filing to filing a claim . Check with your agent regarding filingthe claim !
To protect yourself and your family against the financial risk of illness or injury and to finance necessary preventive health care needs . If you are a billionaire you can disregard this advice . If you are a regular American then you disregard it at your own peril . Health care is expensive . I had to answer this question recently for some people who had immigrated to the U.S.A. , were rather young to early middle aged and who had n't had occasion to use much health care in our country yet . So here are a few ball park figures I gave them from a report from 2012 . The average cost of an appendectomy is around $ 13,300 . The average cost of a day in the hospital is over $ 3400 . A normal child birth runs around $ 8000 and a C-section birth can be in the $ 12,000 to $ 13,000 range . And this is just normal run of the mill life events most people will experience at some time . My late cousin lost his 7-year battle with prostate cancer and while he participated in a lot of experimental programs as M.D. Anderson that were either free of heavily subsidized we still loosely estimated that his medical costs that he could track over that period were well in excess of $ 2 million . My niece delivered a premature child at 26 weeks and the child spent another 6 + months in neonatal intensive care , they 've crossed the $ 1 million dollar threshold and the meter is still running as their child will probably require some level of treatment for the rest of his life . Oh , and you need to have health insurance to protect yourself against the individual mandate tax penalty included in ObamaCare . Which in 2015 will be $ 325 or 2 % of your income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- and that will steadily increase in following years . Hopefully this will help answer your question as to why someone would need health insurance .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
When talking about cash value in life insurance policies it is important to differentiate between the policy value and the surrender value . For example , in a universal life insurance policy the policy value -LRB- or fund value -RRB- would be the accumulated cash value which is earning interest . However , almost all universal life insurance policies have a decreasing surrender charge schedule . This means that if you were to surrender the policy in the early years the surrender charge could reduce most -LRB- or all -RRB- of the value you receive . The value you would receive is called the net surrender value , because it is net of all charges . At some point , say 10 or 20 years down the road , the surrender charges will go away and the policy value will equal the net surrender value . This is part of the reason why cash value life insurance should always be looked at as a long term proposition .
A life insurance policy that has cash value has several non forfeiture options . Should you no longer be able to make the premium payments you may choose to do one of three things . You can use the cash value to purchase a paid up policy . This means you have a reduced face amount for whatever the cash value will buy . You must notify the company if you want this option . If you do nothing and simply stop paying , the policy will go on what is called extended term . The cash value will purchase low cost one year term for the full face amount until the cash value is used up . There are tables in your policy that show this . You could also cash surrender the policy for the cash value .
Traditionally , you can not convert a whole life policy to term . However , one of three options is available to you if you decide you no longer want whole life coverage . One involves converting a whole life policy to an extended term policy . This uses present cash value of the policy to cover the cost of an extended term policy of the same face value . This new coverage only lasts as long as there is sufficient cash value to sustain it . It is usually specified in the policy in terms of the amount of cash value relating to a specific term of coverage . For example , if you have a policy with a $ 25,000 face value and $ 2,000 cash value , this illustration will show how long $ 2,000 will cover the cost of an extended term policy of $ 25,000 face value . Whether the term is 3 years , 5 , or 10 years , coverage ends when the $ 2,000 runs out . Just FYI , the other two options are paid up insurance of a lesser face value -LRB- whatever amount $ 2,000 will purchase -RRB- , or a lump sum payment of the $ 2,000 to the policy owner .
There are several reasons . With cash value life insurance such as whole life , you do not have to worry about prmiums going up as you get older and most likely to need the insurance . The cash value can help provide a buffer if your financial situation changes . Every whole life policy as nonforfiture options in the contract . The cash value can help conserve a poliy utilizing thes options . If you can not afford the premiums any longer the cash value can be used to buy a reduced paid up policy according to a schedule in your policy . You can also stop making payments and the policy will continue in-force with the cash value buying extended term insurance until the cash value is used up . You can cash surrender the policy and get some equity . When you deduct the cash value of a policy from the total premiums you pay you will see that in the long run cash value insurance was far less expensive than buing term . You can also take a loan on your cash value that is very interest friendly and will have no repayment schedule , although it is always best to at least pay the interest since the amount of the loan would be deducted from the face amount when you die .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Is A Good Homeowners Insurance Deductible ?
In a former life I always anwered this question by reminding consumers you have four management areas if you effectively manage your financial affairs . The first area is the `` cash '' or the `` readily available '' funds with no surrender charges . The second area is the `` insurance deductibles '' questions . If I have a $ 1000 deductible on my auto insurance then that $ 100o best be in my checking or savings . The next area is theestate planning of my situation . The fourth area is `` Retirement Planning.I always cringe when I have a client hand me a 1099R during tax season because most individuals do not understand the impact the withdrawal has on their tax consequences . How much `` deductible : should you have-the amount you can keep in your checking or immediately available savings account
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
There are various deductibles in homeowner policies . The higher the chosen amount of the deductible , often between $ 100 and $ 1,000 or more in a typical homeowner policy , the lower the premium you should be paying . The amount you choose as your deductible is what you as a homeowner will absorb in the event of a covered loss . Once the amount of a covered loss is determined , the insurance carrier responds by paying the claim less the homeowner deductible . Generally you choose the amount of your deductible by determining the highest amount you are willing to pay on your own in the event of a covered loss . How much risk can you afford to hold ? Toward determining this , it is important to remember that you do not want to be submitting claims for small losses . A poor loss history will work against you in the long run . So , use that as another determining factor in the amount of your chosen deductible . Always ask your independent agent to help you with this process .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
Generally speaking yes . Windstorm is covered by your homeowners policy , but maybe treated separately by your policy as well . For example if you live in a coastal area wind coverage may be excluded and you obtain what coverage is available through a pooling arrangement such as a wind pool . For Example if you live in Galveston Texas you might you need three policies where as an inland customer would only need one.In Galveston your wind policy might be through the Texas Wind Insurance Association , your regular homeowners policy in the private market -LRB- exclusive of wind -RRB- . You may also be required to have a flood policy -LRB- from the National Flood Insurance Program -RRB- because your insurer does not want to see you in a dilemma of having one group say the damage was caused by wind borne water and another saying it is flood coverage after the loss . To keep your understanding of what is necessary visit with your agent and discuss your personal situation . One other thing I should mention is that depending on where you live you may have a separate , hurricane deductible , wind and hail deductible , named storm deductible . These are often per cent deductibles and can mean a substantial out of pocket costs in the event of a windstorm . They are not exclusively used in hurricane prone areas . For example in Austin Texas you might have a $ 1000 deductible for most homeowners coverage -LRB- perils -RRB- , but 1 % wind and hail deductible even though Austin is over 200 miles to the Gulf .
A deductible is your portion you pay for a claim . Example if you have comprehensive coverage which is deer hail tree and window type of damage if you have a $ 100 deductible then anything over the $ 100 the insurance company will pay . In our state with most carriers the difference between a $ 100 deductible and a $ 500 deductible is only about $ 3 difference a month and most glass shops waive the deductible and rock chips are free . Your NOT saving any money in the even of a higher deductible unless you just happen to have $ 500 handy in the even of a loss . Also Many carriers it does not effect your rates on a comprehensive claim . Now collision deductible $ 500 is the standard so if you cause the accident your responsible for the first $ 500 worth of damage . Example you back into a tree and cause a $ 1000 worth of damage to your car then the insurance company will hand you a check for $ 500 As stated a above by MR. Ratliff a `` good Agent '' wo n't report it I beg to differ Reporting it will NOT raise your rates as much as it would cost to repair it less your deductible . this may be the case in other states but here in Montana this is in most cases it is better to file the claim then pay for it yourself . A HONEST agent will discuss your options on what works best for you and a dedicated agent like our agency has who personally answer the phone 24/7 will tell you what it may or may not do to your rates . In any event contact your agent and they should be able to tell you what works best for you . Also the deductible applies in the event you are hit by someone who has no insurance . So if you are a victim of a hit and run your deductible will apply also . Every state has different laws and rate factors . Sit down and have your agent discuss what works best for YOU ! If you already are on a tight budget and in the event of a loss that higher deductible may not be in your best interest . Many Body shops are willing to work a pay plan on the deductible portion but it is much easier to pay $ 500 then a $ 1000 . Talk to your agent
That is a good question . In most states coverage for auto related claims will fall under your auto insurance . Having said that , some homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for theft away from premises . The more important question is , `` What is your homeowners insurance deductible ? '' If you have a $ 500 deductible and the key FOB is $ 500 , and it was covered , you would collect $ 0 because you have n't exceeded your deductible . Even if your policy did provide coverage , and you exceeded your deductible , I would n't recommend you file a claim . Homeowners insurance is best reserved for catastrophic losses like ; wind , fire , hail , lightning , hurricanes , water damage from a pipe burst , etc. . If you file a claim for your key FOB and next week have to file another claim because of something listed above , the insurance company will have grounds to non-renew or cancel your policy . Even if they did n't cancel your policy , you could see a rate increase because of the claim that was submitted for your key FOB . Over the next few years you would likely exceed the value of the key FOB with increased insurance premium cost . The thought process by the insurance companies is `` frequency leads to severity '' and insurance companies do not like severity . Hope this answer helps .
Something to consider when choosing a deductible is to ask yourself , what are you comfortable with paying if there is a loss vs. what you save . Here is a generic example . Say for example you want a $ 500.00 collision deductible for your car . Now you may be considering a $ 1000.00 deductible to save you a little money . And for example going to a $ 1000.00 deductible vs. a $ 500.00 deductible will save you $ 50.00 every six months . That is $ 100.00 in your pocket annually . It would take you 5 years to break even vs. what you save and what you could potentially pay out and then you are money ahead . This is one good way to weigh the options of what deductible to take and help you make an intelligent decision .
Homeowner policies typically cover wind damage to insured property . However , policyholders need to determine the deductible that will be applied in the event of damage from wind . For example , in Florida where wind is a particular frequency concern , carriers assign higher deductibles that are applied at settlement of a loss caused by wind . It is not uncommon for a deductible that is twice or more of the amount of dwelling coverage deductible for damage from other types of loss causes . The wind deductible is usually a lot higher than your standard homeowner policy deductible . Check with your local independent agency for a review based on your needs and budget .
To find good life insurance , find a good broker . He or she will help you determine what is good for you . What amount ... what cost ... what carrier are good for you ? A good broker will help you find out - and find this all out before you apply , so you can be confident of the outcome of underwriting . Good life insurance is a policy you are glad to buy .
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
If a fallen tree , whether your own or your neighbors , has landed in your yard , on car or on your home , you are likely wondering whether your current homeowners insurance policy will cover the repair costs . Damage to your home and its contents , regardless of whether the trees origin was from your own property or a neighboring , is covered under a homeowners policy . For property such as sheds , additions or detached garages , there is generally a maximum amount of coverage offered for fallen tree damage -LRB- i.e. 10 % of your entire propertys value -RRB- . Even though your homeowners insurance policy will cover damage resulting from fallen trees , it is important to keep in mind that you are financially responsible for any applicable policy deductible . For example , if your homeowners insurance policy has a $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 deductible and the total cost of repairs is $ 25,000 , you will be required to pay either $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 out of pocket for the clean-up to be completed . If the fallen tree was from your neighbors yard , it is possible that your insurance company will attempt to get their policy to cover the cost of the damage . In this event , you may be refunded any deductible you paid for the repairs .
The deductible is the amount of a claim that you have to pay . In a homeowners policy it only applies to property coverages . For example , if there is a fire in your kitchen and resulting damage costs $ 25,000 to repair , the company will make the repairs after you have paid the deductible . Deductibles come as flat amounts or as a percentage of the total amount of coverage . The greater the deductible the lower the rate for that portion of the policy . Deductibles do not apply to many coverages of the homeowners policy , the most important being the liability coverage .
The first thing I recommend looking for is appropriate coverage . Your homeowners insurance should have enough dwelling coverage to cover not only the cost of rebuilding your home , but also cover the clearing and removal of debris is your home is destroyed . All too often , I see homeowners policies that ONLY cover the cost to rebuild . If you do n't have enough to clear the debris , you could get stuck with that cost yourself -LRB- and that cost is in the neighborhood of $ 30,000 ! -RRB- . If the cost to rebuild your home becomes MORE than your coverage , is there anything in place to help pay for that ? For example , Farmers Insurance will include an extra 25 % of the dwelling coverage . So , if your home coverage is $ 100,000 , and it ends up cost $ 125,000 to rebuild your home , Farmers Insurance would pay that amount -LRB- minus your home deductible -RRB- . The final thing I would point out would be the deductible . In many cases , if you have never had a claim , you can have a lower deductible . However , many insurance companies are moving to a higher deductible model -LRB- usually as a percentage of the dwelling coverage -RRB- . So , if your dwelling coverage is $ 200,000 , your deductible would be 1 % of the dwelling , or $ 2,000 . I recommend finding a company that offers a deductible you feel comfortable paying .
A good life insurance agent has some important characteristics . A good agent is a good listener . A good agent will listen to you and will check with you to make sure that you are fully understood . A good agent communicates clearly to both you and to the insurance company . The agent should explain as completely as possible the details of the policy and patiently answer your questions . The good agent will communicate your information and concerns to the underwriting staff of the insurance company . Underwriters are usually quite conservative . The more that the agent can paint a picture that the underwriter can understand ; it is more likely that you will have a good outcome . Finally a good agent offers sound financial advice . A good agent isnt an order taker . A good agent will show you the advantages of alternate approaches to your problem . A good agent will not leave out anything vital to the case and will carefully counsel you as it regards your unique situation . Are there many good life insurance agents ? I think that there are , however , they are often in demand and do little to solicit business . You probably need to check with your colleagues and friends and locate that good life insurance agent that they trust .
Usually , but in a fairly limited way . If there is coverage , it will be for the named perils listed in the policy AND subject to your Homeowners ' Deductible . The coverage may also be limited to a specific dollar amount per piece . If you do have jewelry or other higher value items that you are concerned about , it is best to talk to you insurance professional about `` scheduling '' those items for coverage either on a homeowners ' `` rider '' or as a separate policy all together . There are a couple of advantages to this . First , the item will be covered to it 's appraised value as opposed to some significantly smaller amount . Second , when scheduled these items are usually then NOT subject to the homeowners ' deductible . Finally , in addition to the perils listed in the Homeowners policy , scheduled items are also covered for `` mysterious dissappearance '' which is much broader coverage . This means that there would be coverage even if the item was simply lost . If your diamond falls out of your engagement ring and the ring is scheduled , there would be coverage to replace the stone . There would be no such coverage under a standard Homeowners ' policy .
Most homeowners insurance policies provide some coverage for loss assessments due to a covered loss . If your homeowners association community charges you an assessment for damage that would be covered by homeowners insurance then you can submit a claim for reimbursement . For example , a community here in Richmond , Virgina recently assessed all homeowners $ 3,000 for damage to the pool house due to a fallen tree . My client 's home policy provided loss assessment coverage up to $ 5,000 and since this type of loss is covered on his homeowners insurance he was fully reimbursed less his deductible . Loss assessment coverage does NOT reimburse homeowners for maintenance fees . If your association board votes to paint a build or do any kind of maintenance work this cost is not covered .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Biggest Life Insurance Company ?
The largest life insurance company in the United States -LRB- by assets -RRB- is presently the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company -LRB- aka MetLife -RRB- . MetLife is not the world 's largest life Insurer . The largest life insurer in the world -LRB- again by assets -RRB- is the Japan Post Insurance Company .
MetLife is the biggest life insurance company in the United States and Mexico . Metropolitan Life -LRB- MetLife -RRB- is the fourth largest insurer for life insurance in the world . Prudential Financial is just under Metropolitan Life in size in both the United States and the world markets for total company assets .
The biggest life insurance company in the world is Japan Post Insurance Co , Ltd. . It had over a billion dollars of non banking assets in 2010 . The biggest life insurance company in the United States is MetLife . It had over $ 730 million of non banking assets in 2010 .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
As Lenny said , the biggest advantage of Term life insurance is it 's relatively low cost -LRB- although this is not always the case -RRB- . Another advantage is that it is a simple product , with few bells and whistles , so less complicated to buy than some permanent policies . It is a good choice for those who need life insurance for a set period of time and do n't care about cash value . The biggest disadvantage of term is that the cost will jump very high after the term ends . Another disadvantage is , if you miss two monthly payments , you will need to qualify medically to get your policy back . Some people find it a disadvantage to have to make regular payments , as you can not pay it off ahead of time , as you can with Universal or Whole Life .
Yes , you can get life insurance if you 're overweight . The height/weight profile is one of the biggest factors in the underwriting process - it 's one of the first risk measurements used by insurance companies to determine what risk class the carrier will assign and what rates to charge . The acceptable height/weight range for each risk class can vary substantially from company to company . If you are considered overweight , life insurance companies will want to know the following information to make an accurate risk assessment : 1 -RRB- What is your current height/weight ? 2 -RRB- Have you gained or lost more than 20 pounds in the past year ? Is your weight stable ? 3 -RRB- Are you a smoker or use tobacco products ? 4 -RRB- Are you being treated for high blood pressure or cholesterol ? 5 -RRB- Have you had any abnormal lab results ? 6 -RRB- Any history of cancer or heart disease in the immediate family before age 60 ? 7 -RRB- Do you have any co-morbid conditions , such as diabetes , heart disease , sleep apnea , tobacco use , etc ? Obesity is a condition which can receive favorable underwriting a few companies may also be able to offer a standard rate even when a table rating would normally apply if you purchase permanent insurance instead of term insurance through a table reduction program . Table ratings require an extra premium compared to a standard rate . An example would be a Table D / Table 4 rate would be approximately two times the standard rate . If you are overweight , you should NOT apply with multiple companies at the same time . The more companies that give you a table rating or decline coverage on a formal application , the less likely you are to get a better offer ! You need the help of and independent life insurance agent that can shop your medical profile informally -LRB- no personal information is revealed to the insurance companies , just a general medical profile -RRB- .
Geico is primarily an auto insurance company . They would be lumped in with State Farm , Allstate , Farmers , etc. . All of those company WILL sell you life insurance . And they will pay the claim when you die just like all life insurance companies . BUT a wise consumer should always shop thier life insurance with companies that are focused only on life insurance . You will usually find much more attractive choices . Do n't select life insurance by brand name . That 's the biggest mistake you can make and it 's why companies advertise so much . Select by rates and policy features .
Shopping for life insurance is about as exciting as shopping for a new dentist but there are something 's that you should consider . The companys rating is a factor but not a huge one . If you asked 10 insurance agents to name 3 life insurance companies that werent an A rating that went out of business in the last 20 to 30 years , they probably wouldnt be able to give you an answer . That being said I would still try and look at companies with a B or better rating . The biggest thing to consider is what stage of life youre in -LRB- for more information read our blog `` Did I buy the wrong type of life insurance '' -RRB- , because that will help you determine if you should be looking at companies with great term life rates or if you should be looking for one that sell whole life or index universal life .
Yes , you can get life insurance if you 're overweight . The height/weight profile is one of the biggest factors in the underwriting process - it 's one of the first risk measurements used by insurance companies to determine what risk class the carrier will assign and what rates to charge . The acceptable height/weight range for each risk class can vary substantially from company to company . If you are considered overweight , life insurance companies will want to know the following information to make an accurate risk assessment : 1 -RRB- What is your current height/weight ? 2 -RRB- Have you gained or lost more than 20 pounds in the past year ? Is your weight stable ? 3 -RRB- Are you a smoker or use tobacco products ? 4 -RRB- Are you being treated for high blood pressure or cholesterol ? 5 -RRB- Have you had any abnormal lab results ? 6 -RRB- Any history of cancer or heart disease in the immediate family before age 60 ? 7 -RRB- Do you have any co-morbid conditions , such as diabetes , heart disease , sleep apnea , tobacco use , etc ? Obesity is a condition which can receive favorable underwriting a few companies may also be able to offer a standard rate even when a table rating would normally apply if you purchase permanent insurance instead of term insurance through a table reduction program . Table ratings require an extra premium compared to a standard rate . An example would be a Table D / Table 4 rate would be approximately two times the standard rate . If you are overweight , you should NOT apply with multiple companies at the same time . The more companies that give you a table rating or decline coverage on a formal application , the less likely you are to get a better offer ! You need the help of an independent life insurance agent that can shop your medical profile informally -LRB- no personal information is revealed to the insurance companies , just a general medical profile -RRB- . Feel free to send me a message using the `` contact me '' button if you have any other questions .
Annuities are some of the safest investments you can get . They are backed by the strength of the Insurance Company that issues the annuity . You would want to make sure that the Insurance Company is rated A or better by rating agencies . The biggest thing to determine is what your goal is for the investment , some offer greater principal growth potentials , others are geared to offer the highest income and still others are designed to offer the a combination of things such as Long Term Care funds as well as Income . At our agency in California , we speak to the person to determine what they are hoping to achieve and then figure out what might help do that best . You 'd want to contact an Independent Agent and do the same .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
First I 'd like to say that your question , `` Do I need life insurance now that I 'm getting married '' is a mature question that indicates you genuinely care about your future wife and family and are an intelligent thinker ! Good on ya ! The answer to whether you need insurance or not really relies on your financial strength and goals . If you have a few million dollars in liquid assets you probably do n't NEED insurance ... but you may still WANT to have Whole Life , Cash Value life insurance . The wealthiest people in the world typically are the biggest buyers of WL insurance , because of the value it has . On the other hand there are many people who are self insured feeling that the money they have acquired is sufficient to cover the needs of their family in the event of their demise . Obviously those people do n't know what the wealthiest people know about WL insurance . So in order to determine what kind of life insurance you should consider , -LRB- there are over 10 different kinds of life insurance -RRB- , and how much is appropriate , you should consult with a life insurance professional - preferably one who is not tied to just one provider and can help you to implement the program that will be the best for you . If you would like to talk about this further you can call or email me . I 'm only licensed in Hawaii , but I 'm happy to help you with the more important questions .
There 's many different quality carriers out there that offer life insurance coverage . The biggest factor to determine first is what risk class you qualify for . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines . For example , you may qualify for a preferred risk class from company A , but may only qualify for standard for company B. From there , what type of coverage you need and how much - you want to make sure that you 're comfortable with the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for . You also do n't want to apply to a bunch of different companies at once as this can work against you in many cases . I highly recommend talking to an independent agent who can assist you step-by-step in figuring out which is the best for your specific needs .
Anywhere from $ 20 to over $ 1000 per month ! There are a lot of variables that determine what the premium will be for YOUR life insurance policy . THe biggest determining factors are : age , health , gender , how much insurance and then which kind , -LRB- term , universal , Whole Life , etc -RRB- , and then which insurance company your buy from . Best advise is to work with an experienced Insurance Adviser who is also a Broker and can help you determine what will work the best for you depending on your goals and needs .
Liberty National Life Insurance agency is one of over 1000 insurance companies in the United States . It is owned by Torchmark Corp. , which is a financial services holding company . Liberty National is a Fortune 1000 company , so not one of the biggest . They sell Term and Whole life policies as well as supplemental health insurance policies . Liberty National is a Stock company , which means that it answers to the stock holders first and does not offer dividend participating Whole Life as do the Mutual companies like Mass Mutual , Guardian , and a handful of others . They are based in Texas and do not have a bunch of nice impressive offices around the country . They specialize in `` home sales '' - that is their agents come to you at your home to meet with you and sell their products rather than bring prospects and clients to their office boardrooms , which they do not have . -LRB- Which is why I suspect you 've asked your question ... Someone came knocking on your door ? -RRB- If you are considering purchasing a life insurance policy from Liberty National , I suggest you first read the answers to the question posted on this site , `` What are the Characteristics of Whole Life Insurance '' , and ask if Liberty National policies offer all the same options .
Renters insurance is for renters of homes and apartments as house insurance is for those who own the house . Renters insurance protects YOUR property if there is a loss from say a fire . The biggest issue is what kind of policy you have . Does your insurance give yoy replacement cost or just current value . There is a big difference . Think about what you stuff costs today versus purchasing brand new .
What are the advantages and disadvantages of life insurance ? The advantages of owning life insurance are many as others have already noted . So I will focus on the one advantage life insurance has over any other product or investment option . Life insurance is the only product that instantly creates a pot of money upon the death of the insured . No other product can do this . Every other choice , the money has to be in your account in advance . The biggest disadvantage to owning life insurance is that it is a boring product that simply does it 's job . You will not impress your friends or others at parties when you talk about the performance of your life insurance plan.Cheers .
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
How good is Primerica Life ? Well , they are a decently rated company with premiums charged falling about mid-range on the pricing scale . That is you can find quite a few good companies whose pricing of term insurance is better and you can find other good companies whose pricing is worse . Primerica has a limited product selection and offers no conversion options for the insured if they want to maintain a level cost for coverage for a longer period of time . The biggest knock against Primerica is their field force . They attempt to have their company stand out by disparaging all other companies out there . Which if true , would mean a financial disaster for the country and possibly the world . There are many many very good companies out there and it 's good that there are .
What are the differences between fixed and variable annuities ? Well , the biggest difference would be the investment pool you work from . A fixed annuity investment choices are made by the insurance company and you receive a stated % return for that year . You do n't have to do anything . A variable annuity shifts the investment risk onto the individual and they , not the insurance company -LRB- to a degree -RRB- decide what the annuity will be invested in . The Risk shifts to the insured and while the possibility exists to outgain the fixed annuity , the possibility of loss , even loss of existing balance exists . A variable annuity REQUIRES attention to a much great degree than a fixed .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Asthma Affect Life Insurance ?
Mild , seasonal asthma that has been under control for many years will generally not have an impact on life insurance rates . Moderate asthma with occasional attacks and requiring daily medication will generally raise rates a little . Severe asthma requiring continual steroid treatment and exhibiting recent , frequent attacks can raise life insurance premiums significantly . If smoking or COPD is involved along with severe asthma , it could result in a decline .
If you have very mild or seasonal asthma that does not require daily medication , you can be be rated better than Standard with some companies . If you have well controlled asthma with daily medication , you can most likely expect around a Standard rating , but it depends on the policy , and you could be rated a little better or worse . If you have had an emergency room visit for your asthma within the past year , you could be given a table rating , or even declined by some policies . Contacting an agency that sells a variety of products can help you get with the company and policy that will provide your lowest price for your particular type of asthma .
Mild , seasonal asthma that has been under control for many years will generally not have an impact on life insurance rates . Moderate asthma with occasional attacks and requiring daily medication will generally raise rates a little . Severe asthma requiring continual steroid treatment and exhibiting recent , frequent attacks can raise life insurance premiums significantly . If smoking or COPD is involved along with severe asthma , it could result in a decline .
Asthma is a rapidly growing disease in the USA . There is abundant evidence as to the effect of asthma on the longevity of people . Insurance companies can determine mathematically the variation that someone with asthma makes to the normal distribution of mortality . Underwriters take a subjective look at individual cases and make determinations of the effect they expect the asthma to have on the longevity of the customer . They then make an offer of insurance .
Xolair is a special class of asthma medication that is administered by injection . Xolair should be covered under Medicare Part B if properly administered in a doctor 's office . Xolair is only approved for those over the age of 12 who have specific asthmatic symptoms that can not be controlled with other medications .
Symbicort is an inhaled steroid used to provide symptomatic relief for severe asthma and COPD patients . Symbicort is not a rescue inhaler . Medicare Part D will cover most outpatient medications including Symbicort . Each Part D plan is different . Check the formulary and compare total costs before assuming your have coverage for Symbicort .
This really depends upon the company . Some companies will still give you a favorable rate if your asthma is under control . Others may not offer a preferred rate or even surcharge for it . There is no hard and fast answer . The best strategy is to find an agent you trust and give him/her your health history . That will give them the information to be able to find the best place for you .
Yes . The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
The benefits under each individual health plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
Divorce does affect life insurance but maybe not in the way you are asking your question . It does not affect your premiums or cost but it will affect other aspects of your policy . The first thing that needs to be addressed is the beneficiary . You may not want your ex to receive your life insurance proceeds . Next aspect to be examined is your face amount . Now that you are on your own , do you have the proper amount of life insurance for children , loved ones to cover debt , etc. ? Last is the term or type of policy . Are the premiums guaranteed for the proper amount of time ? I recommend sooner rather than later sitting down with your agent to address these needs before it becomes too late .
If your question is what affects the stability of life insurance rates , the answer is , not very much . Life insurance rates are based on multiple millions of lives and death rates are predictable . A dramatic change in the financial markets could affect life insurance rates if the companies can not earn the necessary returns to maintain their promises . A dramatic epidemic could affect rates . Recently rates were affected by regulation . These changes are generally small .
Term life insurance does n't affect financial aid . Life insurance owned by a trust and out of the estate does n't affect financial aid . However if the cash values of a personally owned life insurance policy are cited as an asset for personal bank loan purposes or business loans , it could be construed as a cash asset and may be characterized as an asset for financial aid means testing .
No , basal cell carcinoma does not have much of an effect on life insurance premiums , if any . Squamous cell carcinoma does affect rates more , depending on the stage , how long ago it was removed , and whether there was any recurrence or multiple spots . Melanoma , of course , has the most significant impact on life insurance rates of cancer affecting the skin , and may cause a decline if past stage 1 occurred within the past year .
Getting married does not affect Medicare except in one way . The premium you pay for Part B may change , as that is based on your and your spouse 's income together . Getting married does NOT affect your plan , your deductibles , your co-pay 's , your premium for Part C and D , etc. .
In most cases , just having a pool does n't necessarily affect the pricing of a Homeowners ' policy , but it does affect underwriting requirements and should get you thinking about the best way to cover for that additional exposure . Here in Connecticut , building codes for each town regulate the security measures that are required for pools . In ground for example require fencing and self latching gates . Insurance rules will undoubtedly match that so if these are not in place , coverage wo n't be offered . As for the increased liability exposure , having a pool is one of many good reasons to talk to your Insurance Professional about Person Umbrella Liability policy for added protection .
Yes , scuba diving can affect life insurance rates . Recreational scuba diving less than 50 feet does not affect rates at all with many life insurance companies , so that if you are able to get the best rating based on your health , your diving will not bring that rating down . Some will allow the best or Preferred rating for divers who are experienced and do not exceed a depth of 75 ' . Being a certified diver and/or diving only in a club or with an instructor helps get the best rates . When dives are over 75 ' or the diver does cave diving , rescue diving or diving alone in remote areas , the scuba diving can bring rates down to Standard , add a flat extra , or even cause a decline . Agents familiar with this type of policy can get all the pertinent details from you and find out ahead of time which company has the best price for your particular type of scuba diving .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Is Van Insurance Cheaper Than Car Insurance ?
Every vehicle has an assigned symbol . That symbol is based on the average cost of claims for that particular vehicle . Occasionally that symbol will change as there is increased claims experience . That symbol is part of the formula that determines the rate charged for your particular vehicle . An insurance agent can give you specific information .
There are not enough details to even try to provide an educated guess on the question . The term `` van '' are you refering to a mini-van , a conversion van , a cargo van , or are you talking about an industrial truck or semi that are sometimes refered to as `` vans '' ? The best way to find out the rates for certain coverages on certain vehicles is to contact your local agent to have them get you pricing .
There are not enough details to even try to provide an educated guess on the question . The term `` van '' are you refering to a mini-van , a conversion van , a cargo van , or are you talking about an industrial truck or semi that are sometimes refered to as `` vans '' ? The best way to find out the rates for certain coverages on certain vehicles is to contact your local agent to have them get you pricing .
Typically no , however their are some companies that will write the LLC on a personal policy . First ask yourself why you would want a personal policy instead of a commercial policy when you are trying to separate liability . You can purchase commercial policies in various increments starting at $ 100,000 in coverage . This premium should be commensurate with a personal policy premium . Also , a commercial policy will allow for more drivers to be listed on the policy and provide coverage for all the members of the LLC . Ask your accountant why the LLC would want to own the vehicle ? Then get with your insurance agent to find the best coverage for you which will include a risk assessment on what you have to lose . Example , you have $ 200,000 worth of equipment in that van , where is the coverage for the destruction of that equipment ? Personal policies will look to your home or renters insurance , whereas a commercial policy can include coverage for transportation to and from the events . Personal policy maybe cheaper , but it may also not cover you for an accident .
Auto insurance covers the driver first , the vehicle second so yes , you would be covered if your rent a van and are in an at fault accident . The company renting the van will carry coverage on the van itself and you may be responsible if you do any damage to the van as specified in the contract you sign .
A van is considered a private passenger vehicle just like any auto so you can drive a van with a gross vehicle weight of under 10,000 with your auto insurance . This would include up to a 15 passenger van such as a Ford E350 . Anything larger then that would be a commercial vehicle and would most likely not be covered by your personal auto insurance .
When you say , transfer do you mean that the van will replace the car ? Or do you mean that the van is an additional vehicle to be added to the policy . In either case the procedure is relatively simple . You wouldnt be able to replace a Fiat with a road grader because commercial risks are handled differently . Some pick-ups are so large that they require special handling .
A specified percentage of your property is covered when it is not on premises . Items of personal property would be covered if taken from a car . Damage to the car would not be included in the settlement and a deductible will be applied to the adjusted claim . Be careful on what you claim , though . Recently a customer claimed the loss of more property than could possibly have been in a large van and the car in question was a very small sedan . Adjusters are stupid .
Always check with your insurance professional before renting a car . Generally speaking , unless you have special limits found in a non standard policy , the coverage you have on your personal auto policy does extend over to rental cars while they temporarily replace yours . Keep in mind , though that if you have an older car , for example , and are not carrying Collision on your policy , you will not have collision on the rental . The Liability coverage you have transfers fully , but comp and collision only transfer if you have them . Remember though that I referred to a rental car . This extension of coverage does not necessarily include rental vans or trucks used for moving or hauling.One other thing to keep in mind . Many credit card ccontracts provide some limited coverage if used when renting a car.This is usually up to $ 500.00 which may be enough to cover the deductible from your personal auto policy .
Your car insurance will cover a rental car if you carry full coverage on your policy . If you have an accident in a rental car you will still be subject to your comprehensive and collision deductibles . Some companies will not cover commercial trucks -LRB- example : Uhaul truck -RRB- or vans so check with your agent just to be sure .
If you are renting a van your auto policy will cover you . The limits from your auto policy will apply to the rented van that you are driving . There may be some administrative advantages to purchasing the insurance the rental company provides but in the long run , there should be little difference in coverage .
Not necessarily , no . In fact , some companies charge higher premium for larger vehicles such as large SUV 's , vans or pickups . These larger vehicles can cause much more damage to people and property than can smaller , ligher vehicles so the liability portion of the policy would be proportionally more expensive than for a smaller one . As for the physical damage portion of the policy , namely Comprehensive and Collision , as my colleague stated earlier , the rate a company charges is based more upon their loss experience with a vehicle than it 's relative size and weight . I have not seen a situation where a smaller vehcle receives any sort of a premium surcharge .
In order to operate a car in most states you must meet minimum financial responsibility limits . These are normally represented by insurance with specific bodily injury and property damage liability coverage . While this satisfies the state requirement it is not sufficient in many accidents . The company is only responsible to meet the amount of coverage provided . If your limit was $ 30,000 of liability coverage and you hit a van carrying two children and both of them required ambulance service to emergency and were seriously injured , your limits would be exhausted in the first few days . The remaining expenses will probably appear as a law suit against you and any assets that you might have . Your lender will require that you maintain physical damage insurance on your car . In fact , they retain the right to purchase a collateral protection certificate which is something like insurance and pass that cost directly to you if you fail to maintain coverage . The lending company will give you latitude as to how much deductible you can select but they want to make sure that their interests are protected . The most important thing to understand is that the cost of an insurance policy is best determined when you have a claim . If the policy doesnt cover the damages , it was too expensive . Select well because it can make a substantial difference when you experience a claim . When you meet with an insurance agent to select coverages it is best to choose an agent who will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . Setting limits is a critical issue . The agent should tell you the maximum amount of liability insurance that he can provide in your situation . You should start with this maximum number because a lawsuit can cause serious damage to you financially . If you can afford the additional premium you could even consider an umbrella policy to extend further the liability limits . Often property damage liability limits are separate . Many cars cost in excess of $ 50,000 and in the event of a multiple car accident exceeding $ 50,000 is possible . Take as much coverage as is offered . The agent will then offer you medical payments coverage . Select the highest available limit unless you are confident that you will not have an occupant in your car who is not fully insured for medical care . This coverage will allow you to call for an ambulance and make sure proper medical care is extended to those in your vehicle . Your company will offer uninsured and underinsured coverage . This protects you should you be hit by someone without insurance or someone with inadequate insurance . This situation comes up frequently and this coverage should not be overlooked . Consider a high limit . The company will probably offer an accidental death and dismemberment benefit . That benefit is a form of life insurance when death or dismemberment is the result of an auto accident . It is highly restricted but it is also very inexpensive . Other benefits such as stowing and roadside service provide you with a single point of contact should you have mechanical problems or a collision . Generally these are a good value .
Among the many factors that go into calculating the rate are the safety of the vehicle and the odds of it being a total loss in event of an accident . Often larger vehicles such as vans or SUVs are less of a risk than smaller cars when it comes to that .
Probably so , yes . You see , in many cases , if you had automobile insurance , it may not extend coverage onto a commercial van or truck like that anyway . So in a case like that even if you had your own insurance , you would need to obtain the coverage that Uhaul might offer as part of their package .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
` Business Use ' is a rating classification -LRB- or used to be -RRB- used in rating a personal auto policy . Many personal auto insurance carriers in the past did not allow a ` business use ' classification on a pickup or van so a commercial autoor business auto policy had to be obtained for that vehicle . With the rating methods used by carriers today , it may be possible to insure a vehicle on a personal auto policy and use it for business purposes . The agent or broker providing the quote -LRB- s -RRB- should be able to advise you . If you are purchasing personal auto insurance online , you are acting as your own broker and good luck to you in obtaining the coverage you should have for such a situation .
There is no way to answer this general question but I can provide you some guidance . If this is a commercial use vehicle the vehicle will be rated on where it is operated , how it is operated , radius of operations , and the industry it serves . Then we 'll need to know the coverage required . Commercial vehicles have the same coverages as you will find on a personal auto policy . A vehicle insured as I suggest for business with full coverage and used as a service vehicle , will cost from 3-7 % of its value new each year for the liability and physical damage coverage . I just insured a 2014 work van used for service by a property owner and a value of $ 33,000 MSRP new and the insurance cost was under $ 1,100 a year for $ 1 Mil CSL Liability and UM/UIM , $ 5,000 Med and $ 500 comp and coll deductibles in Ciincinnati . Use as a guide only . Your mileage may vary .
Admiral Car Insurance is an Insurance Company located in Great Britain , UK . They offer car insurance , whether for one vehicle or multiple vehicles . They also cover other lines of insurance including insurance for your home , new driver discounts , and Life Insurance . Van , motor bike and travel insurance are also included in their portfolio . The number for customer service is : 0844-543-4416 . Admiral.com is the website .
I am not aware of the term joint car policy . However , if you mean , Is it cheaper to have two cars on the same policy or with the same company ? the answer is generally , yes . Most car insurers offer a multi-car discount . If you are really asking if it is cheaper to have an auto policy with two insureds , technically , it doesnt make any difference . In California auto policies are issued to households and all the drivers in the household are considered .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Why Is It Important To Start A Retirement Plan As Soon As Possible ?
A columnist for Fool.com , Morgan Housel , just wrote a terrific article on this topic titled , An Open Letter to Everyone Under Age 30 . He describes why the best estimate for what stocks will return over many decades is 6.6 % per year , and then goes on to put some real numbers to what 6.6 % growth means : Every dollar saved by a 20 year old for the 45 years until retirement will grow to be worth $ 18.50 . Since a 30 year old only has 35 years until retirement , each dollar saved will only be worth about $ 9.60 . As Housel says , `` Saving a little bit of money when you are young can be a more efficient way to build wealth than saving a lot when you 're older . ''
Albert Einstein was fascinated over the mathematical power of compounded interest over time . The sooner you start saving for retirement the better . The consequences for procrastination are expensive and will dictate the lifestyle you 'll lead in retirement . A retirement plan is essentially paying yourself first . Social Security may be inadequate , so it 's up to you to fund your own retirement , starting today .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
First of all , put money in tax advantage accounts . Deposit funds into Roth-IRAs , municipal bonds , life insurance policies and 529 college savings plans if you have kids . When clients open these accounts , they normally do not have to pay taxes when the money is withdrawn . Why ? The client is contributing to these accounts with after-tax dollars . Next , protect yourself by obtaining disability insurance , long term care coverage , health insurance and buy life insurance . Clients need life insurance so that loved ones can pay the bills and have funds to provide for the family . The long term coverage will help just in case a client needs care in a nursing home . Reduce your liabilities as soon as possible . Get out of debt and stay out of debt . Set aside at least three to six months of your monthly salary . There might be a change in employment , there might be an accident , or repairs to the home or car . Here is a brief overview that will help clients plan for retirement . Start early . For example , if you save $ 10 a day for 30 years and invest the money at 8 % per year , you would have almost $ 450,000 for retirement . Moreover , if clients saved $ 20 a day for 30 years at the same rate , he or she would have almost $ 900,000 for retirement . This is why the concept of using tax advantage accounts is so important . Here is a good rule of thumb when planning for retirement . According to the Financial Analysts Journal , `` Americans need to save 22 times their income '' to retire comfortably . What does this mean ? Clients that make $ 40,000 a year , need $ 880,000 when they retire -LRB- i.e. $ 40,000 x 22 -RRB- . Keep in mind that this is only a tool to use that will help you with your retirement planning . Finally , clients need to take into consideration their home mortgage balance -LRB- s -RRB- , the kids college education costs and life insurance needs . I will be glad to help you meet your retirement planning goals . I listen to all my clients first . Then , we develop a plan and then we execute that plan . I can be reached at 912-631-3186 .
That is an excellent question ! I am pleased to hear of your interest , as a Roth IRA is a terrific way to save for retirement . I can not advise you strongly enough to start saving for retirement as soon as possible . Yesterday is not soon enough . Conventional wisdom says to retire at your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times your current salary . Please start one soon , and if possible , contribute as much of the annual $ 5500 that you can -LRB- $ 6500 if you 're 50 + -RRB- . I hope that helps - thanks for asking !
It sounds cliche , but you should start saving for retirement as soon as you start working . With longer life expectancies we are now living 20 , 30 even 40 years into retirement . Allowing the power of compound interest to work for you means the sooner you start the bigger your Nest Egg will be . Within 10 to 15 years of retirement , positioning for growth and protection is even more important . Since you would have less time to recover from a drop . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
Your policy probably indicates that it is your responsibiliuty to notify the company immediately in the event of a loss . My suggestion is that you contact your Insurance Professional as soon as it is possible for you to do so safely so that they can guide you through the process . Taking the time to gather as much information as possible is always helpful , but certainly get in touch with them the day of the loss if at all possible . Property and losses may cause damage that can get worse over time so getting the ball rolling as soon as possible is in your very best interest .
Plan F offers the most comprehensive coverage of the new standardized plans . Plan G offers the best over value when compared to Plan F. Plan N or High Deductible plan F will offer the lowest over all premium , but with that you may take on additional out of pocket risk . Plan selection can also be influenced by the time of year you are switching . Switch to Plan G at or soon after the beginning of the year . If you are in the middle of the year and have plan F , it may be better to stay with Plan F. Each situation is different and that 's why it 's important to work with a broker .
The original purpose of Life Insurance - the reason it was created is to transfer the risk of a person dying too soon from that person and their loved ones to the insurance company . Generally if a person dies while still having debt or not having enough money to care for their heirs , that person has `` died too soon '' . In a lot of people 's opinions dying at any time is too soon ! But that 's a philosophical consideration . Over time Permanent Life Insurance has come to play an important part in the financial well-being of insureds while living . Term insurance on the other hand remains solely for the purpose of insuring against a person dying too soon . Peggy listed a number of uses for Permanent Life Insurance , and I would add that the cash value of whole life insurance is a terrific asset for use in personal banking applications . For more information see WEBSITELINK
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
You should plan for retirement as soon as possible . If you can start investing in your early 20s , even if it is just a few dollars per paycheck , you will have a big advantage over those persons that wait until their 40s before contemplating retirement . Be consistent , diversify and allow a full-time broker or financial planner -LRB- not part-time -RRB- help you .
That is a great question ! One of the biggest issues we face in the financial industry is the cold truth that many people start thinking about their retirement far too late to adequately fund it . There are few conversations that are harder than having to tell someone that their current income will not allow them to save enough to fund the retirement plans they had dreamed of . Starting early really helps make saving enough a real possibility . By not thinking , `` I 'll start next week/month/year '' the process begins , and allows for enough time to make the possibility a reality . Modern wisdom says to live on your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times that much . If you 're barely making ends meet now , you 're probably going to want to save even more . To be on track to make your retirement goals , the rule of thumb in your twenties is save 15 % of your income . Starting your savings in your thirties increases that to about 22 % . Starting in your 40 's ? Think about setting aside about 27 % . 50 's ? Better plan on nearly 40 % . You can see how increasingly difficult it can be to make up the ground as you age . It is so much easier to start young , and take advantage of time to help build your savings . Having time to build your savings becomes easier when things like employer matching on company 401k 's and compound interest are available to take advantage of . Investing enough in your company plan -LRB- assuming your company is good enough to you to still offer one -RRB- to earn their match doubles your savings , and over time , will make a huge difference . Same with compound interest . Opening an account with compounding interest and depositing in it even if it 's small amounts and infrequently will lead to large values in that account when you are ready for retirement . Many people find that saving the money is hard , studies show nearly 60 % of all American 's do n't have enough savings , and over half of Americans entering retirement age are afraid they will not have enough money to retire on . By having a good , working budget , the willingness to cut back on extra 's , and some dedication , you can avoid being one of them . Please feel free to contact me if you 'd like some help with a budget , or ideas on how to get started saving , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Immediately ! Call your agent or insurer and get started on that process . Claims can take a while to resolve or they can be resolved quickly . If you have a police report or evidence ready to go as soon as you file your claim , it can often get fixed faster . That said , you can usually submit your evidence after the initial filing . I 'm not aware of any company that wo n't let you submit evidence after filing your claim but there are a lot of companies out there . Long-short of it , file as soon as possible .
You dont have to bother if you dont have to . At least in this country for the time being , life insurance is not something that the government forces us to buy . And I hope the day never comes , because it would really mess up the life insurance marketplace . So the purchase of life insurance is voluntary . Who , then , should buy it ? If you are a billionaire , should you buy life insurance ? Sure you should . Lets suppose your estate would owe the government $ 100 million in taxes when you die . To pay this fee , your heirs might have to liquidate a bunch of businesses and buildings and other assets . They would then pay the bill dollar for dollar . Or , you could buy life insurance and pay the bill for pennies on the dollar . And keep all your assets intact as an inheritance for your heirs . Not only that : lets suppose you started a foundation to eliminate world hunger or some other noble cause . Lets suppose you wanted to leave the charity $ 100 million as a gift when you died . If you bought a life insurance policy and left that to the charity , you would only have to pay a few cents in premium for every dollar a benefit . You would have that much more money left over for other good causes . A very good use of your money . Now , lets suppose youre not a billionaire . Should you buy life insurance ? Heres the question : do you have a more economical way to take care of your family ? They have become dependent upon you . Why force them to reduce their standard of living when you die ? You could start putting money away into a fund . But what happens if you tragically died next year ? Would you have really accumulated enough money to let them live their lives ? Life insurance would provide them with all the money they need as soon as it is needed . No other financial product comes to the rescue like that . Why not die looking like a hero , as someone who cared and took measures to provide for his love ones ?
As soon as possible , the greatest asset you have is time , and it takes time for money to build . If you add earning a rate of return on your money and have that money compound over the years than your money can grow to a huge lump sum . What you want to do is find the right savings vehicle that will give you the best return . How about a tax free retirement ? Are you familiar with tax deferred ? How about avoiding penalties if you take an early withdrawal . There are many things to consider but the earlier you start the greater chance you have of saving a lot of money for retirement .
Starting a retirement plan -LRB- or planning for retirement -RRB- should start as early as possible . Even if it 's just $ 10 or $ 25 per month while you 're in your early 20s , it will pay huge dividends -LRB- figuratively -RRB- as the money continues to grow . My employer offered matching contributions for my 401K . I started immediately and it made a big positive difference in my retirement planning . I started and never stopped . Diversification is important at all times . A full-time financial adviser or broker -LRB- not a marketer or advertiser -RRB- is your best resource . They can monitor your progress , make changes and guide you to an early and enjoyable retirement . Putting dollars in your pocket is their goal .
That is a great question ! The best answer I can give you is as soon as it is possible . You should n't count on Social Security or Medicare to be solvent after the next 10-15 years . Economists are predicting a monstrous rise in the poverty rate when that happens . I 'm not a doomsayer , but unless something radically different starts happening with the people we elect to govern us , it 's most likely that those programs go belly up . If that happens , you haveabout that long a head start to put away as much as you can . The rule of thumb is 8-10 times your current salary , to live as you do now . Please start a savings plan today . If you need help , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
The best answer that I can provide : `` As soon as practicable . '' This is the best answer I can provide because each insurance contract details under the common policy conditions when a claim must be reported . Typically , most contracts require that you report it as soon as you possibly can -LRB- i.e. as soon as practicable -RRB- . Moreover , in addition to when you must report the claim you have too look at what other conditions must be met , like preservation of property , filing a police report and cooperating with the insurance company . I hope this helps .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Is Dwelling Coverage In Home Insurance ?
Simply stated , the listed Dwelling coverage is the amount for which your home is currently insured . This is most commonly based upon the calculated reconstruction amount of the building . The policy will more than likely include a `` replacement guarantee '' settlement provision which means that should the house be damaged by a covered peril , the policy would pay the settlement based upon current construction costs . As always , check with your insurance professional to discuss the specifics of your policy .
Adequate home insurance coverage is very important , and the discussion should be had with a professional independent agent . The best way to answer this question is to provide some general information for the primary/main coverage types on the home insurance policy -LRB- please note that each state and company policy coverages and requirements vary . This is why it is important to review in detail with your professional independent agent -RRB- . Dwelling value : this is the coverage limit that protects the structure/dwelling . Ideally , this coverage limit needs to be set at the proper replacement cost valuation . In the event of a total loss -LRB- fire , tornado ... -RRB- , what is the amount of insurance coverage on your dwelling that you would need to get you back in that exact same house?The answer to this question is the dwelling amount coverage limit that your home insurance policy should have . Personal property/contents coverage limit : this is the coverage that provides protection for your personal belongings . It is suggested to take pictures of your belongings -LRB- especially your more valuable items -RRB- as well as have copies of the pictures and any receipts to provide proof of ownership in the event of a claim . Again , like with the dwelling value we discussed above , the question here is what is the value of all of your items in your house ? Or , what would thecost be toget everythingwhat you have now in your house if a fire or tornado destroyed it all?The answer to this question is the personal property contents limit that your home insurance policy should have . Also - please note that if you have a mortgage on your home , most often the lender will require the loan amount or 100 % ofthecalculated structurereplacement value to be the required dwelling coverage amount.This amount can vary , and to ensure that you are getting the coverage protection you need without overinsuring , please review with your local professional independent agent . Liability coverage/medical pay to others : this is about the least-expensive part of a home insurance policy , but it is very important to have . The minimal amount of liability coverage suggested to have for this coverage category is $ 300,000 , although usually the bump up in coverage to the $ 500,000 liability limit is usually very small . And , the medical payments to others coverage should be at $ 5000 . These coverages protect you from injury that an unrelated -LRB- visitor -RRB- sustains while on your property , or that you are deemed to be liabile -LRB- responsible -RRB- for . Please note that these are just a couple of the important insurance coverages that are included on your home insurance . There are many other coverages that might be included with the policy that you choose or there might be other suggested coverages that you can add to your home policy that gives you the extra coverage protection that you need . There is not a general coverage limit or value that is used for determining the proper coverages for your home insurance . Every client is different and so are their needs . Make sure that you review what your needs and coverage requirements are , and let an independent agent create a policy specifically for you and your needs .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
The first thing I recommend looking for is appropriate coverage . Your homeowners insurance should have enough dwelling coverage to cover not only the cost of rebuilding your home , but also cover the clearing and removal of debris is your home is destroyed . All too often , I see homeowners policies that ONLY cover the cost to rebuild . If you do n't have enough to clear the debris , you could get stuck with that cost yourself -LRB- and that cost is in the neighborhood of $ 30,000 ! -RRB- . If the cost to rebuild your home becomes MORE than your coverage , is there anything in place to help pay for that ? For example , Farmers Insurance will include an extra 25 % of the dwelling coverage . So , if your home coverage is $ 100,000 , and it ends up cost $ 125,000 to rebuild your home , Farmers Insurance would pay that amount -LRB- minus your home deductible -RRB- . The final thing I would point out would be the deductible . In many cases , if you have never had a claim , you can have a lower deductible . However , many insurance companies are moving to a higher deductible model -LRB- usually as a percentage of the dwelling coverage -RRB- . So , if your dwelling coverage is $ 200,000 , your deductible would be 1 % of the dwelling , or $ 2,000 . I recommend finding a company that offers a deductible you feel comfortable paying .
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Homeowners Insurance typically includes coverage for your actual home -LRB- the Dwelling Coverage -RRB- , coverage for separate structures -LRB- such as detached garage or shed -RRB- , coverage for your belongings -LRB- both the items inside your home , as well as items that may be outside of the home -RRB- , liability protection -LRB- coverage that protects you if you are sued -RRB- , and medical payment coverage -LRB- an amount thatcan paid to someone that is injured on your property -RRB- . These 5 items are usually included in any homeowners policy -LRB- renters and landlord policies have variations of these -RRB- . However , some insurance companies also include some extras at no additional cost . For instance , Farmers Insurance includes an extended coverage of 125 % of the dwelling coverage . This means that if the cost to rebuild the home exceeds the amount of dwelling coverage , Farmers Insurance will cover an extra 25 % over and above the dwelling coverage . Farmers Insurance also includes ID theft protection , and a few other extras .
Homeowners Insurance consists of Dwelling Coverage -LRB- Home -RRB- , Other Structures , Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- , Loss of Use and Personal Liability Coverage . To answer the question , the Dwelling Coverage should be sufficient to rebuild the home from the ground up following a covered total loss ; this would be a total reconstruction estimate to rebuild the home . Most insurance carriers have a method of calculating the replacement cost of a dwelling based on the characteristics input when you request the initial quotation ; in most cases , this is a safe number to properly insure the home . Regarding Personal Liability Insurance , it is a good idea to purchase the maximum limit available since this coverage is very inexpensive and is not subject to any deductible . Most carriers offer a maximum limit of $ 500,000 for Personal Liability . If in the process of purchasing the necessary coverage , the consumer is attempting to generate a lower premium charge , it would be a good idea to accept a high deductible which will prove to offer a much lower premium with relatively low risk to the insured . There is a system available to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States . An exemplary online experience for all with the ability to select different options and adjust your home insurance quote as necessary . WEBSITELINK
When you establish a Home Insurance policy , some of the coverage is automatically included , and some of the coverage is optional . Let 's take a look at the included coverage first . Coverage A - Dwelling : This is the primary coverage for the policy and dictates the amount of some of the other included coverage limits . This is the amount that the insurance company will pay up to in the case of any claims . From a simple window breakage due to storm damage , or a total loss due to fire , the maximum the policy will pay during any one policy period -LRB- typically a year -RRB- would be the amount shown on this coverage Coverage B - Other Structures : This coverage is for fences , detached garages , unattached decks or gazebos and etc. . The limit on this coverage is typically a percentage of Coverage A , for example 10 % of the amount of your dwelling limits . This coverage is in addition to Coverage A , meaning if a loss damaged more than just the dwelling , you can collect on both . Coverage C - Personal Property : This is the limit the policy will pay to replace your belongings , furniture , clothing , and etc. . Typically this is 50 % of Coverage A , and again this is in addition to Coverage A. Coverage D - Loss of Use : If there was a claim initiated on your property , and you had to find temporary residence while repairs were being made , or the home was simply no longer livable , this would be the coverage that would apply . Typically this is 30 % of Coverage A and would be in addition as well . On top of these coverage limits , you can have additional coverage through either automatically included or optional extensions of coverage . These can include , but are not limited to : Debris Removal ; Cyber Theft Protection ; Credit Card and Forgery ; Trees , Shrubs and Plants ; Fire Department Service Charge ; Ordinance or Law ; Glass Breakage ; and additional riders to increase personal property coverage above limits . For example , the policy might restrict replacement of Money/Gold/Coins to only $ 200 per claim . Or Jewelry , Furs , Precious Stones to $ 1000 per item / $ 5000 per claim . These riders would increase coverage for those specific items you might have that are of greater value . Finally , there is coverage for Personal Liability , which is included in most policies , but is not calculated as a percentage of Coverage A. Typically the limits provided for this coverage start at $ 100,000 and can be as high as $ 1,000,000 or more in some States . This coverage would apply if you were ever personally sued for any activity other than a vehicle accident , as your auto policy would cover that . I know that 's a lot to think about . I highly recommend you meet with a licensed insurance agent in your area to have them walk you through all of the options available and help select the right amount of insurance for your individual needs .
Many carriers will issue a homeowner policy form to cover a home construction project when it is new construction . You may also use a `` builders risk '' dwelling policy form when a homeowner policy is n't permitted . Most carriers offer one option or the other . If a homeowner policy is used the `` vacancy an unoccupancy '' provisions can not be enforced during construction or renovation . Make sure to ask these questions of your agent or carrier to make sure coverage applies while under construction . You should also control the insurance and you should not insure the builder in that process . The primary issue here is one of what we refer to as `` insurable interest '' . Quite simply , you have the most to lose in a loss of the home and as a consequence you need to buy insurance to protect both your property interest and provide the lender with protection for the collateral -LRB- your dwelling -RRB- used in the loan . The building or contractor may have an interest in installed materials up to the point they make a draw for the installations , but their interest ends at that point because they do n't have an ownership position in the home . They can purchase `` installation '' coverage in their insurance package that will protect them for the value of their work installed and it is not expensive coverage so they should have this already . Do not agree to assume responsibility for their liability either . If it is their construction site , it is their responsibility to maintain as best as possible to minimize the potential liability exposures . That said , you should make sure to purchase and maintain personal liability for the property too for any potential risk of loss that would be excluded by the building in the site management . Alternately , some carriers will amend current policies to add the new address for liability and then you would n't need to have this coverage added to your builders risk coverage . By the way , the dwelling policy form permits -LRB- in many instances -RRB- the addition of endorsements that provide coverage for the value of material delivery to the site that you might have purchased . These building materials are subject to theft and it is a good idea to know if the builder or you are responsible for materials delivered to the site . Also , a dwelling policy should be created to the new total value of the improvements and original structure on either a replacement cost or actual cash value basis . I suggest replacement cost . Insurance to value is important even on this type of policy . Carriers using the dwelling form of coverage will pro-rate valuation to an average state of completion for premium calculation , but valuation at the time of loss is also tricky so keep good records so you can rebuild the entire structure after a major loss . Cleaning up the concepts here also makes it necessary to make sure that the contractor has general liability and workers compensation insurance . If they have vehicles that operate on the property you should also insist that they provide evidence of vehicle insurance . In every instance above , you should be listed as an `` additional insured '' and `` certificate holder '' during the performance of the construction tasks . If possible , ask them to waive subrogation . Get evidence in writing . A commonly used form is the `` Acord 25 '' Certification of Liability Insurance form and this is commonly provided ask for and get written evidence of coverage as noted above .
Home Insurance , Hazard Insurance or Property Insurance are synonymous general terms . 1 - 4 unit homes are usually protected by a Homeowners Insurance Policy -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy -LRB- Tenant Occupied -RRB- . The Homeowners Insurance Policy covers the Dwelling , Detached Structures , Personal Property , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others most commonly written on Form HO-3 published by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . It is important to study the features and perils covered ; for example , damage caused by Earthquakes and/or Floods is not covered . The Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy covers the Dwelling , Detached Structures , Loss of Rent , and Premises Liabilitymost commonly written on Form DP-3 published by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . It is important to study the features and perils covered ; for example , damage caused by Earthquakes and/or Floods is not covered . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
There are several factors that can increase premium in a homeowners insurance policy . One could be the cost of construction . Since the home must be insured with enough dwelling coverage to cover the home in a total loss you my see an increase in dwelling coverage thereby an increase in premium . Also age of the home can be a factor . In brand new homes most insurance carriers give big discounts for up to 10 years . As the home ages the discount diminishes until gone . Generally all other factors aside the home can remain in a stable position until the home becomes around 30 yrs old which can at that time start increasing premium do to the risk increasing . Another factor is just a rate change by the carrier mostly due to high losses in any given area . And of course your claims history is a factor .
The word dwelling just simply means the primary structure or the home it self . So for your question dwelling insurance is home insurance or landlord insurance which is still the home in question . If you look at a declarations pages of a policy you will notice Coverage A which is refereed to as Dwelling .
Homeowners Insurance primarily covers damage due to fire and other covered perils to the primary residence of the titled owner of the dwelling insured . Homeowners Insurance is defined as an insurance contract to protect owner occupied dwellings . For homes that are tenant occupied , a Landlords or Dwelling Fire policy would be needed . Homeowners Insurance will cover the dwelling -LRB- house -RRB- , other structures -LRB- garage , gazebo , guesthouse -RRB- , personal property -LRB- furniture , appliances -RRB- , loss of use -LRB- additional living expenses -RRB- , guest medical payments , and personal liability -LRB- for family residents -RRB- . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
New York Homeowners Insurance cost will depend on what is being insured . Home Insurance covers the replacement cost of the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal liability and medical payments to others . The age , size and construction characteristics of the home will dictate the reconstruction cost which will be used as the Dwelling Coverage Amount . If you are looking for a lower premium than generated , we would recommend selecting a higher deductible option . The deductible does not apply to Liability and Medical Payment claims ; however , it is the amount deducted from a loss payout for physical loss to the dwelling , other structures and/or personal property as covered on the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy New York Home Insurance online ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
There are many factors that affect the policy premium pricing . Therefore , more questions than answers ... initially ... First of all , what State are we talking about , since rates vary greatly from State to State , not to mention significant regional variations within a State ? For one example , think of a coastal location exposure to wind vs. a dwelling located inland and not generally exposed to the same potential perils . Which one is going to present the highest chance of risk for wind damage losses ? This will definitely affect the premium . Additionally , one insurance company 's rates can vary greatly from those of another . Also , a few of the many other questions : What is the amount of intended insurance needed on the dwelling ? How old is the home ? What type of construction ? What type of fire protection and proximity to the dwelling ? What other types of protection devices and method of monitoring ? Any dangerous animal breeds ? Swimming pool ? You really need to talk to an agent about rates in your location . Ask for quotes from the strongest carriers . Ask particularly about their financial strengths and claims paying histories . Try to get carriers with A.M Best ratings of A or better , if at all possible . Additionally , many State Insurance Departments have consumer information for the public , relating to homeowner polices . Do some of your own ` on-line ' research , if possible . You can also ask other homeowners in your area about their carriers ' pricing and experiences with claims .
There are many reasons why a home insurance policy would increase . Homes are insured for replacement of dwelling or in other words , what does it cost to build . If cost of construction and materials increases then replacement cost will increase which means your dwelling amount , or the amount to insure increases , which of course causes an increase in premium . Other factors could be regional rate adjustment do to losses . Also age of your home could be a factor . Claims you may have made could be a factor . Did you un-package your auto policy from your home could be a factor . There are many factors which should be discussed with your agent to determine premium changes and what if anything can be done to adjust the rate .
Homeowners insurance is comprised of several variables but I 'll discuss some of the major components . First and foremost you want a Replacement Cost policy . Second , you need to work with your agent to determine the proper amount of Replacement Cost coverage -LRB- the cost to rebuild your home -RRB- . Once this amount is determined the other coverage lines are a percentage of the dwelling coverage . Here 's an example of the major components : Dwelling - $ 500,000 Other Structures - $ 50,000 -LRB- 10 % -RRB- Personal Property - $ 350,000 -LRB- 70 % -RRB- Next , you need to select your deductible . Deductibles typically range from $ 500 - % of your dwelling coverage . I recommend at least a $ 1,000 deductible because you do not want to file small claims on a home policy . There are other optional coverages that are very important such as Water/Sewer Backup and Law and Ordinance coverage . Identity Theft and scheduled items can also be added . As always it 's best to discuss your options with an independent agent who can present several options specific to your needs .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How To Get A Tummy Tuck On Medicare ?
Medicare covers most medically necessary procedures under Part A and Part B. Cosmetic surgery is generally not covered although there are exceptions such as breast reconstructive surgery follow a radial mastectomy . A tummy tuck is normally done purely for cosmetic reasons and would not be a covered expense under Medicare .
Generally speaking no . Health insurance will not pay for a tummy tuck as it is typically regarded as an elective surgery . However , if you can get a healthcare provider to deem the procedure medically necessary to may be able to get some or all of it covered by health insurance . You may also be able to get other less involved and potentially less costly procedures covered like mini-tummy tuck or Panniculectomy .
It will depend upon your medical situation ; 1 -RRB- No Scenario -LRB- the most likely -RRB- - the skin removal is for cosmetic purposes . This is generally understood to extend to persons who have meaningful weight loss that leaves them with excess skin . So , you may have done the right thing by losing a lot of weight but you may have to reconcile yourself to living longer with a flabbier body or privately pay for cosmetic surgery . 2 -RRB- Yes Scenario -LRB- uncommon but not rare -RRB- - where medically necessary criteria are met . There are circumstances where there can be recurring health problems caused by skin overhang -LRB- yeast infections , sores and rashes , infections , etc. -RRB- that can be remedied or mitigated by removing the overhanging skin , a Panniculectomy . This is not the same procedure as what is commonly referred to as a `` tummy tuck . '' The Punniculectomy only removes the overhanging skin and does not address the stretching of abdominal muscle that can also occur and which is commonly addressed in the `` tummy tuck '' procedure . As such , depending upon the terms of your policy and how a claim is coded I can foresee the situation where both procedures are performed -LRB- if the doctors went on and did the more invasive abdominal muscle procedures while `` they were in there '' and this was done with your prior consent or request -RRB- and part of the procedureis covered by the policy and the other part being deemed for cosmetic purposesand not being covered .
As a general rule , a `` tummy tuck '' is viewed as cosmetic surgery and is not covered by health insurance polices . However , obesity is becoming an increasing problem in our nation.This has resulted in a growing number of people who have reached health or life threatening levels of morbid obesity for which they have had either prescription and/or surgical treatments that result in extreme weight loss . In some cases the weight gain has stretched the person 's skin to such an extent that after their extreme weight loss following treatment their skin does not return to normal levels and the person is left with folds of skin which can , in some cases , become sources of medical problems themselves -LRB- e.g. - severe rashes and infections -RRB- . In these extreme circumstances the insurance company may agree that it is an issue of medical necessity that this issue be surgically addressed and the will approve coverage for the removal or lifting of this excess skin tissue . This has been the only circumstance where I have seen an insurance carrier approve what might be construed as a tummy tuck .
Medicare will only covered medically necessary procedures . Since a tummy tuck is usually cosmetic , it will most likely not be covered by Medicare . There may be rare situations that make it medically necessary but as a rule the answer to your question would be no it is not covered .
Medicare covers most medically necessary procedures under Part A and Part B. Cosmetic surgery is generally not covered although there are exceptions such as breast reconstructive surgery follow a radial mastectomy . A tummy tuck is normally done purely for cosmetic reasons and would not be a covered expense under Medicare .
A tummy tuck will be covered under your health insurance plan as long as it is considered -LRB- and coded -RRB- as medically necessary by your attending physician . Often times this is considered an elective procedure and wo n't be covered . It 's vital to contact your carrier prior to the procedure to find out how -LRB- if at all -RRB- they will cover the surgery . The best place to start is to call the benefits verification or pre-certification phone number on the back of your insurance cards .
Medicare generally will only cover Medically necessary expenses . It will not cover cosmetic surgery . Since a `` tummy tuck '' is usually not medically necessary , it is doubtful that the procedure would be covered , so unless your doctor can show a sound medical reason for the procedure I would n't count on it being covered
Health insurance is designed to cover treatment that is medically necessary . A tummy tuck is considered cosmetic surgery , not a medical necessity , so your claim would be denied . If you decide to have the procedure you will pay for the cost out of pocket , and you will pay full retail .
Tummy tucks are generally considered to be cosmetic procedures which would not be covered by most health insurance plans . If a procedure is determined to be medically necessary by a physician , the plan may provide some coverage for it . I would talk with your agent/contact the carrier to see what benefits the plan would provide , if any , for this type of procedure .
A tummy tuck -LRB- I always thought they could come up with a better description -RRB- is typically not covered if it is for cosmetic reasons . And usually , they are . However , if it is related to a medical condition and must be performed to prevent additional health issues , it could easily be covered . It 's best to check with your broker .
One reason that life insurance can be a good investment is because it is safe . Life insurance that has been tucked away can be a source of great comfort and surprise to survivors . Unlike other investments that have strict tax guidelines to follow , a forest of paperwork arriving in the mail , and the constant need of evaluation , most life insurance policies are pretty steady and low maintenance . And sometimes slow but sure is a good type of investment to have .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
That is an excellent question ! There are a couple of things that will determine how quickly you can obtain your license . The first is how quickly you can become enrolled in , and complete your State required training class . -LRB- There may also be company required training that you might need to complete before being able to sell , btw ... -RRB- You will also need to schedule and take your State exam , and get your fingerprinting and background checks done . It is a really wise idea to look into getting your Errors & Omissions insurance while in the process also , so that you can hit the ground running once licensed . So depending upon how well you learn and test , and how easy it is to get everything scheduled , you can expect your licensing within a couple of weeks , to a cople of months . If you would like to know how it went for me , please contact me , and I 'll talk to you privately about it . Thank you for asking !
That is a great question ! And an interesting one . I guess the answer depends upon how long you 've had the policy , and how well you 've kept track of it ; or whether it is a good policy to get at all , if I 'm reading into your question rightly . Here 's what I advise people . A UL policy can be a good thing if you are somebody that keeps an eye on everything , and has extra money lying around . You also have to have a healthy risk tolerance . Agents will rightly tell you that this type of policy can bring great returns , but press them hard , and make them tell you exactly what stars and moons need to align for that to happen . What is the actual performance of the policy over time , not the best case scenario printed in the sales brochure ? How much over the minimum payment is required to achieve that performance ? That 's what you need to know if you are thinking of purchasing one . If you already have one , are you paying attention to how well it is still funded ? You could be in for a surprise if you have n't . Call your agent , and get an idea of how it 's doing for you , and how long you can expect it to be in force . Functionally , you can use the proceeds for everything that you would any other whole life insurance policy . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How To Determine How Much You Need For Life Insurance ?
The need for life insurance is to make sure your loved ones are taken care if something terrible happened to you suddenly . When you said your wedding vowels , you promised to take care of each other until death did you part . Life insurance is the one product that can keep that promise forever . The general rule of thumb without going into an in depth needs analysis is to cover your debts and up to 10 times your income . This way if you died today , your family would be debt free and could invest the rest with a good investment program that your loved ones could live off of the interest and not touch the principle where your income would be replaced year after year even though you are gone . Unless you are independently wealthy , life insurance is a must for every family . Use a trusted independent life insurance broker that can find you the best coverage at the best price for your unique situation .
I do n't see life insurance as a `` need '' issue but rather a `` want '' issue . Conventional wisdom would have you go through a `` needs analysis '' where you decide on some criteria such as inflation , interest rate , minimum income needed , etc. . I prefer looking at it from a `` human life economic value '' position . In other words , what is the present value of all your projected future income ? Insurance companies simplify this by using a `` multiple of income '' factor based on age . That is the maximum a company will issue someone . I ask clients this simple question ... `` If something happens to you , how much of your income do you want to make sure continues to your family ? '' Many say `` all of it '' and others say something else . Whatever they say , we work from there .
Of course this is a question that has been asked for many years . I think that it is best to answer that question with another question , Who do you love ? After that a follow-up question would be , What do you want them to have if you are unable to be there to provide it for them ? Most people want their loved ones to continue to have food , shelter and clothing . They might have aspirations concerning higher education . All of these issues can be measured and a sum determined .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an independent life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a permanent be suitable to the need . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Realistically speaking , most people are not going to purchase enough coverage to cover every need that they have - many times this is because they ca n't / do not want to write the check for such a high amount . You should look at which are the most critical needs you want to meet , how long do you need to have each of them covered for - this will point you in the direction of how much coverage is appropriate to have and how long you will need it for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
How to determine how much life insurance one needs is an exercise that all conscientious insurance agents go through with every client . It is a dereliction of duty not to do so . Of course once the need is determined it still remains up to the client how much to put in place . In determining the amount of insurance needed , of primary importance is to define what the goals are of the insured . If the main goal for the insurance is to provide for dependents then the requirements for that provision will be the main determining factor for the amount needed . If the main goal for the insurance is to provide additional income in retirement then that requirement will be the determining factor . So to answer your question depends on who the insurance is for . If it is for you , you should talk with an Insurance Adviser .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
The first step in buying life insurance is to determine how much coverage you need , what type of insurance will work best for your needs , and how much it will cost . With life insurance you can not just pick out the policy with the features that you like . You must qualify medically , and your overall mortality risk -LRB- or lack thereof -RRB- determines your rate . What company you use and the type of policy you choose also figure into the premium you will pay . So the best way to buy life insurance is to talk to an agent who can help you determine how much you need , explain what types of policies work best for that need , and then shop around to find the best rate for which you qualify . Good life insurance agencies stick with you and guide you through to the time when the policy you want is in your safe , ready to go into action if tragedy strikes . While a life insurance agent is the last person most people wish to consult , in the end , most policies require an agent as the middle person , anyway . Starting out by calling an honest agent can make the process very simple and help you save hundreds of dollars .
There 's generally a limit to how much life insurance you can have . With most insurance companies , this limit is 20x your income - some companies may view a limit of 25x income or 30x income . Even if you do not have your entire coverage with one carrier , these limits will still apply - on every application , the carrier will ask you about existing or pending coverage and want to know the total amounts you have or are looking to place in force . Keep in mind , there has to be an insurable interest and a need to buy the coverage -LRB- e.g. income replacement , estate planning purposes , family protection , etc. -RRB- . The average person does n't have enough coverage to cover every financial need - generally due to their ability to write the check for the amount needed to cover every need and/or not understanding how much coverage would be necessary to cover all of the financial needs -RRB- . A life insurance needs analysis is a great way to determine how much coverage you would need to cover all financial burdens in the event of your death - as many may not want to buy the resulting amount , you can break the figures down and determine which needs are the most important to protect . Your best bet is to work with an independent life insurance agent/broker than can go through the needs analysis process with you and compare multiple options to find the program that will best serve your needs .
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an independent life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a permanent be suitable to the need . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Realistically speaking , most people are not going to purchase enough coverage to cover every need that they have - many times this is because they ca n't / do not want to write the check for such a high amount . You should look at which are the most critical needs you want to meet , how long do you need to have each of them covered for - this will point you in the direction of how much coverage is appropriate to have and how long you will need it for . If you have any other questions or would like help with your coverage , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button , or call me at 703-665-9133 .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
At first I understood the question as Peggy did , then I saw Bob 's answer ... So I 'll address both concepts . Life insurance FOR children is a great idea and a great GIFT ! That is WHole Life - not Term . You can start a policy on a baby for $ 50,000 very inexpensively and by the time they are adult , the policy could well have doubled in face value and grown several thousands of dollars in cash value . That cash could be used for college , to buy a car , etc. . Then the policy could be turned over to the now adult child to continue as protection for their future family , etc. . The amount of Life insurance needed for yourself when you have children has many variables to consider when determining how much is enough . I always recommend to buy as much as you can afford . Again , Whole Life . There are tax advantages , cash value and other benefits that only come with Whole Life . If you also have a spouse in addition to the children you 'll want to consider how much it would take to replace your income . Is there a mortgage ? Do you want to pay for college for your kids ? These things and more should be considered when determining how much is needed . You 're best bet is to consult with an experienced Insurance Adviser to figure out what your needs are , and then to help you find the best company and policy to meet those needs .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Car Insurance Build Your Credit ?
Generally no . Insurance companies do not report the payment of your insurance premiums to credit bureaus . One caveat however to be aware of . If you lapse or cancel a policy and earned premium is due the insurance company for coverage provided and yoo do n't pay it , the earned premium may be turned over to collection and the unpaid debt reported to the credit bureaus .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
I am assuming that this question is asking if having automobile insurance helps a persons credit score . Based on my education and my experience so far in the industry , I would say no it does help build your credit score . To the best of my knowledge insurance carriers do not directly provide any financial information to the credit agencies .
Term life insurance has a definitive ending . If you purchase 20 year term insurance it will end in 20 years . Other types of life insurance include Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life and each of these would be considered a type of permanent life insurance . Universal Life insurance can last your entire life if structured correctly . Universal Life can have a flexible premium which will allow the excess of premium above the actual cost of insurance to be credited to the cash value of the policy . Interest is credited to the cash value each month , adding to the cash value , once policy expenses are taken out . The interest percentage is set by the insurance company . Using the same flexible premium concept , when you determine the amount of interest to be credited to the policy by referencing a financial index such as the S&P 500 , it is an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . No money is actually invested in the referenced stock market . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those required to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Some insurance carriers may use a credit score for rating purposes . Most of the insurance carriers in my state -LRB- New York -RRB- use a ` credit profile ' which means they access one of the big three credit bureaus and select specific items . What they select , how they interpret the data , and how it affects your premiums is not available for your scrutiny . In NY , credit profile is mostly used for new business quoting purposes for home and auto insurance . Carriers in NY load in a whole bunch of rating info when determining your premium - gender , age , marital status , own or rent your home , driving extract , # of years licensed , prior claims on home and/or auto policies , is your prior carrier preferred , standard , or substandard , distance driven to work , pleasuire or business use , and a lot more . Keep your ` credit profile ' and score as clean as possible . Most banks and credit unions have credit specialists who can advise you for free on how to do this . For example , pay all bills ahead of time if possible and always pay more than the minimum amounts . Do n't have credit lines totaling more than a certain % of your gross annual income , etc. . Credit profile is a major influence when getting insurance quotes . I know of no ` proof ' credit profile is a determinate of loss potential , but using credit profile for insurance rating is the way of the world .
Massachusetts does not require you to obtain `` Renters '' insurance as it does auto insurance but your landlord or just good judgment may suggest this coverage be considered . Renters or Tenant/homeowners coverage provides coverage in three principal areas ; Damage to your personal property -LRB- clothing , furniture and/or household items -RRB- , Additional expenses to live in temporary quarters should your apartment or building be damaged or destroyed by a fire , wind or other covered cause , Personal liability coverage should certain acts cause injury or damage to someone , possibly your neighbors or even the building you occupy . Anyone responsible for maintaining a household should at least consider securing this type of coverage . It beats digging into your savings after a storm or fire or waiting for the Red Cross to give you a shirt , a bed and a hot meal . The cost for a basic policy would be in the $ 150-200 per year range . It certainly would be considered as important as maintaining comprehensive and collision insurance on a used car . In fact , simply increasing your deductibles on your car insurance may reduce your premiums enough to permit you to secure a basic policy .
Credit reports and scores are commonly used by auto insurance companies when underwriting and pricing the policy premiums . Credit scores have been shown to be highly correlated with future auto insurance claims . However , auto insurance companies do not report premium payment or claims information to the credit bureaus . So there is no direct impact of car insurance on your credit worthiness . However there may be an indirect impact on your credit if you suffer an auto accident while uninsured , or under insured . You may suffer from a loss of income if disabled . There may be extra medical bills , car repair expenses , and other liabilities . Any of these situations could make it difficult to make timely payments on any existing loans or debts . Late payments will certainly hurt your credit .
When you get married your car insurance should be less unless your spouse has a bad driving record or poor credit . Credit is a major factor for car insurance and when you get married some companies will average your credit scores and some will take the highest credit score . Make sure you ask about a multi-car discount as well .
Among the many factors typically used to determine homeowner insurance rates , here are a few of the key ones : Type of Construction , Age of Dwelling & Condition of Dwelling - Ex : Is the construction type ` fire resistant ' rather than wood frame ? Has the building been well cared-for ? Claims Submission History - Ex : Does the prospect have a history of submitting claims on a frequent basis ... especially smaller ones ? Dwelling Location - Fire station proximity ; History of frequent and / or severe losses in the area from wild fires , hurricanes , etc. . Credit History - Credit score - Prevailing underwriting theory is that better credit scores equate to less possibility of frequent claim submissions . Additional Risk Factors - Swimming pools , with or without child safety devices ; Questionable types of animals in terms of temperment , as relates to possible attacks on humans ; Recreation equipment on premises - safety devices ?
That is a great question ! It is a fact that many insurers will base a part of your premium cost on your credit rating and history , so it pays to have a solid score and history . In a way , your insurance can affect your credit rating , but only in the same way that any other monthly account would - do you make your payment on time and regularly . But the fact of having insurance will make no real impact at all on your credit rating , other than building good payment habits . Thank you for asking !
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
Yes you can . Having a tough credit history may mean that you pay more for the coverage than say your neighbor who has very good credit . Credit really only effects the base pricing when a car insurance policy is being rated . This is very much unlike a bad driving record or accident history that can directly effect not only pricing but availability of standard issue car policies . As has been said before , keep in mind that credit is only one of many factors that can have an effect on what you pay for your car insurance protection . Talk to your Insurance Professional about any available discounts .
The reason why landlords want insurance is to protect themselves for either property loss or a liability suit . If you are a tenant in a commercial building and a client of yours gets hurt on your premises then that client may potentially sue you . If you have no insurance the client may sue the building owner just because it 's the landlords building even though the tenant may be the party who caused the loss . Same is true for private residences . The landlord does not want to take on a suit because your friend fell down in your home . Now for the record , just because the victim goes after the landlord does not mean you are off the hook as a tenant . If the landlords insurance ends up having to pay a claim you can almost surely bet they are coming after you so my suggestion is carry the insurance . There are way to many upsides and virtually no down side .
Yes , Indexed Universal Life Insurance works . If your goal is to build up cash value inside a life insurance policy that can offer financial flexibility later on , then it can work great . Universal life insurance accumulates cash inside the policy due to the success of a financial index such as the S&P 500 . Most companies give you choices of individual indexes or blends of several indexes and offer a `` floor '' of zero or 1 % . It is important to note that your money is NOT in the stock market . Interest is credited to your account if the referenced index goes up over a pre-selected length of time . Generally , insurance companies will put a cap on the amount of upside you can get because they are guaranteeing you no downside if the index goes down . Often , the caps can be 13 % - 17 % with blended index choices . Make sure you set reasonable expectations for what `` success '' is , though . Building significant cash value inside an indexed universal life insurance policy does n't happen over night . You should allow 10 to 15 years for accumulation for college education costs or a retirement income stream . And remember , even if you use the available cash build-up over the years , you still have the death benefit to pass on to your family upon your passing . As always , it is all about `` fit '' when it comes to financial products and Indexed Universal Life is no different . The design of the IUL is important and best left in the hands of an experienced , licensed financial professional .
Renter 's Insurance does n't just insure your personal property . It comes with Liability Insurance as well . This is what the landlord is interested in . I will give you an example . Let 's say you had a candle burning and it caught the building on fire . If the building burns down , the landlord will collect from his insurance company . That insurance company then has a right to come after you since you caused the fire . Knowing that most people who live in apartments do n't have sizable net worth 's they assume they wo n't be able to get you to pay them for the damage to the building and for loss to other tenants in the building . So , the landlord 's insurance company probably gives him a discount for requiring tenants to have Renter 's Insurance . Your Renter 's Insurance will pay for certain types of damage that are caused accidentally by you , such as fire and explosion under your liability coverage . This is a great way to protect your assets and Renter 's Insurance is very Inexpensive . If I can help shoot me an email at dbeukel1@amfam.com .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Life Insurance Pay For Death By Natural Causes ?
Life insurance benefits are paid whenever an insured dies during the period of time that the policy is in force . There is exclusion against suicide in the first couple of years and there are times when the company might contest a claim based upon misrepresentation but that would rarely be affected by someone dying of natural causes .
Yes , life insurance pays for death by natural causes as well as for accidental death . The only exception is usually suicide within the first two years of getting the policy . Life insurance sets itself apart from accidental death insurance in that it pays for death by any illness , natural causes , or death by any other reason .
does life insurance pay for death by natural causes ? If the policy is in good standing , then yes , a life insurance policy will pay a death benefit upon submittal of a death claim form and a certified copy of the death certifivate . They also payany interest earned on the death benfit from the day of the death until the date the check is issued .
Yes , life insurance does pay for natural death -LRB- death due to natural causes such as illness or old age -RRB- . Accidental death insurance does not pay for natural death . Graded life insurance policies will pay a reduced amount for the first 1-3 years for natural death , depending on the features of the policy . After the graded period has passed , graded policies will also pay 100 % for death due to any reason , including natural death .
Yes , Basic Life Insurance does cover accidental death , as well as death due to natural causes -LRB- i.e. illness , old age -RRB- . You sometimes have the option to put an Accidental Death rider on a basic life insurance policy . This increases the amount that would be paid to your beneficiary if you died accidentally , as opposed to dying from natural causes . Usually accidental death riders are offered in options of multiples of your basic death benefit . E.g. Your policy would pay $ 100,000 if you died of illness . But with the Accidental Death rider it would pay 2 times that amount , or $ 200,000 , if your death was due to an accident of some sort . However , without that rider , the policy would still pay $ 100,000 for death due to accident OR natural causes .
Accidental Life Insurance will only pay if the death was the result of an accident , it will not pay for a death due to natural causes . In most cases an accidental death is the result of some physical injury or trauma . Examples would be death from a car accident , falling off a roof , or being shot . Normally a heart attack would be the result of a medical condition -LRB- natural causes -RRB- and not the result of an accident . That being said , it is possible that a person could die of a heart attack that was the result of an accident . There could be a case where a person was skydiving and unable to open there parachute . This realization could trigger a heart attack causing the person to die before hitting the ground . This would be a case of a heart attack caused by an accident , not caused by natural causes .
In addition to the excellent explanations offered by the other agents on this page , life insurance claims are sometimes denied due to the nature of the policy . If you purchase a graded policy , it will pay a reduced benefit for death due to natural causes during the first 1-4 years . With that type of policy , death due to accident will usually pay 100 % from day one . Sometimes accidental death is actually caused by a health condition -LRB- e.g. heart attack while driving a car -RRB- . When the claim is denied , it can come as a surprise because survivors were not aware that the policy was a graded during the first two years , and/or that the root cause of death was determined to be natural vs accidental . The same is true for people who think they are buying life insurance , when they are actually buying accidental death insurance . You need to be very careful about what type of policy you are getting so that your claim is not denied simply because you purchased the wrong type of policy . A final , common reason for denial of claims is late premium payments . In our office , we spend a lot of time each week reminding people whose policies have entered the grace period , that they need to pay their premium or lose their coverage . But many agencies due not send reminders , and it is easy to lose track of addresses , phone numbers , and email address of clients because people change those frequently in today 's society . At the very least , keep your address up to date with the insurance company so that you will receive any late notices and keep your policy in force for the time of need .
No , AD&D is not the same as Life Insurance . Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance only pays if death is cause by an accident , or if a limb is lost due to an accident . It will not pay if a person dies from illness or old age . Even if the accident is cause by illness -LRB- e.g. getting in a fatal car accident while having a heart attack -RRB- , an AD&D policy will generally not pay the death benefit . Life insurance pays for death cause by illness or by accident . Since most death occurs by natural causes , more death benefits are paid , and the policy has a higher premium than AD&D . But the chance of having a permanent Life Insurance policy pay out is nearly 100 % , where the chance of ever collecting on an ADD&D policy is very low .
Graded Benefit Whole Life Insurance is permanent life insurance that does not pay out the full death benefit for natural death until you have had the policy for a while . The average graded period is two years . During this time it may pay a percent of the death benefit for death due to natural causes such as illness , or it may return all you paid in plus a little extra . After 1 to 4 years , a graded policy will pay 100 % of the death benefit . They usually also pay 100 % from day one for accidental death .
Accidental death and dismemberment is conditional coverage . In other words in order to pay out , things have to happen a certain way . First , death from natural causes do not cause payout . Second , death from an accident has to occur within a certain time window . A person injured in a car accident holds on for 91 days before passing . Unfortunately , the policy died the day before as it had a 90 window for payment occur . The reason AD&D is inexpensive to purchase is the probability of payout is low . Regular life insurance pay upon death by accident or natural causes .
Accidental Life Insurance policies will not cover heart attack , even if a heart attack was the cause of a fatal accident . To get coverage for death caused by heart attack or any other natural cause , you must purchase traditional Term or Permanent Life insurance . Life insurance covers death due to natural AND accidental causes .
Accidental Death and Dismemberment insurance -LRB- AD&D insurance -RRB- pays for death due to accident , such as falling down stairs or being in a car wreck . Life insurance pays for death due to accident AND natural causes , such as cancer or old age . The reason Accidental Death insurance usually costs less than Life insurance is because the number of people who die from accidents is a fraction of the number of people who pass from natural causes .
Accidental Life Insurance does just what it sounds like . It protects you ONLY from accidents . Meaning if you die from an accident , your beneficiaries will recover . However , if you die of natural causes , it will not pay . Is that what you really want ? What are the odds of dying only from an accident , versus from natural causes ? I would urge you to consider a normal life insurance policy , which will pay your loved ones , regardless of the cause of your death . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Yes , Life Insurance pays for accidental death or death due to natural causes . Death due to natural causes is death due to and illness or internal malfunction of the body not caused by external forces . Death due to unnatural causes is called accidental death . Life insurance covers all types of death except suicide in the first two years .
Life insurance pays the proceeds upon loss of LIFE . The cause of death is irrelevant , except for a few conditions such as suicide during the first two years . AD&D insurance pays the proceeds for ACCIDENTAL DEATH & / or DISMEMBERMENT . Most death is caused by natural causes , which means that Life insurance policies pay out far more often then do AD&D policies .
There are many final expense policies that do not require any exam , that you could take out on your mother to assist with her funeral and burial expenses . Your mother will need to sign the application , and she may need to do a phone interview in order to be approved for the policy . The type of policy that requires a phone interview may have a slightly lower cost , and more importantly , pay 100 % of the death benefit from day one for death by any reason -LRB- except suicide in the first two years -RRB- . If she is unwilling or unable to do the phone interview , there are guaranteed issue policies available in most states that can be obtained without a phone interview . They will have a 2-3 year `` graded '' period where premium is returned if death occurs during the first years due to natural causes , or pay a percentage of the death benefit for death due to natural causes during the first 2-3 years . These policies are available in face amounts from $ 1,000 to $ 25,000 + . The perfect amount to supplement your mother 's policy so that her burial expenses can be covered in full .
Accidental death insurance costs less than life insurance because death by accident occurs far less frequently than death due to natural causes . Even accidents that are caused by health conditions are not covered by accidental death insurance . Also , you can not get accidental death insurance at older ages . To find the price of accidental death insurance , you can contact an agency that sells life insurance . Most offer a stand alone accidental death policy , or can add an AD&D rider to your life insurance policy .
Life insurance differs from AD&D in that Life Insurance pays for death by any reason , whereas AD&D only pays for death by accidental reasons . AD&D stands for Accidental Death and Dismemberment . If the death is due to falling down stairs , car accident , etc , the policy will pay the death benefit . And some policies also pay for the loss of an extremity . But if death was due to illness -LRB- even an accident caused by illness , such as driving into a tree while suffering a heart attack -RRB- , the policy will not pay . Life insurance covers both types of death : natural and accidental .
does life insurance pay for death by natural causes ? If the policy is in good standing , then yes , a life insurance policy will pay a death benefit upon submittal of a death claim form and a certified copy of the death certifivate . They also payany interest earned on the death benfit from the day of the death until the date the check is issued .
Colonial Penn Life Insurance will pay a death benefit after a waiting period of a couple years , for death due to natural causes . During the first two years , it will pay a death benefit plus a small percent more . It pays 100 % of the death benefit from day one for accidental death that was not caused in any way by the insured person 's health condition -LRB- s -RRB- . If your health is not very poor , you may be able to get a No Exam policy that will pay 100 % from day one for death by any reason . You may also be able to get a larger face amount than you can get through Colonial Penn , and/or at a lower cost . Nonmed policies offered by other companies are also easy to get . So do n't settle for Colonial Penn until you have contacted a broker who can tell you what else you can get , so you can make an informed decision .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Much Is Home Insurance Every Month ?
Home insurance can cost as little as $ 20 per month or much much more . The rate depends on your dwelling amount coverage -LRB- personal property etc. . . too -RRB- and other underwriting factors such as the age of your house , how far you are from a fire hydrant and your claims history . Of course there are many available discounts such as 55 and retired and burglar alarm .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There 's generally a limit to how much life insurance you can have . With most insurance companies , this limit is 20x your income - some companies may view a limit of 25x income or 30x income . Even if you do not have your entire coverage with one carrier , these limits will still apply - on every application , the carrier will ask you about existing or pending coverage and want to know the total amounts you have or are looking to place in force . Keep in mind , there has to be an insurable interest and a need to buy the coverage -LRB- e.g. income replacement , estate planning purposes , family protection , etc. -RRB- . The average person does n't have enough coverage to cover every financial need - generally due to their ability to write the check for the amount needed to cover every need and/or not understanding how much coverage would be necessary to cover all of the financial needs -RRB- . A life insurance needs analysis is a great way to determine how much coverage you would need to cover all financial burdens in the event of your death - as many may not want to buy the resulting amount , you can break the figures down and determine which needs are the most important to protect . Your best bet is to work with an independent life insurance agent/broker than can go through the needs analysis process with you and compare multiple options to find the program that will best serve your needs .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
Why does health insurance increase every year ? Actually there have been times where this does n't happen , but I would be harded pressed to remember . The thing that needs to be understood is health insurance premiums are a reflection of the cost of care rising . Most states office of the insurance commissioners have a ton of informtaion that can be accessed to review exactly how much an insurance company pays out . I often describe insurance premiums much like my own checkbook . Each month money comes in and each month money goes out . I only hope at the end of the month , there is some left over .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
-- > Normal 0 How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? I doubt anyone can give you the correct answer because the cost to rebuild your home will vary considerably depending on how it is damaged . If your home is the only one damaged in your area , for instance a fire in the home , the cost to rebuild will be one number . And if a number of homes in your area are damaged or destroyed , for instance a storm or wild fire , the cost to rebuild could be significantly more as materials , labor and contractors may be in short supply and cost much more . So how does one address that possibility ? Some , not all , insurance companies offer a Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost feature that can be added to your policy . Under this feature , you are required to purchase an amount of insurance consistent with the current cost to rebuild your home at normal prices . If your home needs to be rebuilt following a loss , the amount of insurance will automatically increase to whatever you need to rebuild the same home you had before the loss . That is the only way I know of to always buy the right amount of insurance , get one that adjusts to changing loss conditions . Otherwise , its just a guessing game and if you are wrong , you lose , not the insurance company .
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
How does Guaranteed Universal Life work ? Just like level term . Think of it as lifetime level term . With term insurance you pay a premium every month and you have coverage . With GUL you pay the premium every month and you have coverage . The GUL rider on a polcy states that as long as the premium is paid and the policy values remain untouched the company will pay a death claim out to the age chosen by the insured . It could be to age 90 , 100 , 110 , 121 or until passing . The big thing with a GUL vs. a Level term policy is cash values . With level term the insured does not see the cash values generated by the level term policy during it 's level premium run . With level term you overpay early to underpay later and this keeps the premium constant . Same with GUL except now you can ` touch '' the money inside the policy . This is a bad thing if you want the guarantee to remain in place . You simply do not want to mess with your GUL beyond paying your monthly premium every month . GUL is NOT a saving plan ... it is Lifetime TERM , or at least , it should be treated that way .
There are carriers that sell just one month policies It depends on the state that you live in . I know that Hallmark insurance based out of texas has this type of policy . otherwise you are stuck with a 6 month policy paying month to month . There are advantages to one month policies however they literally are 30 day policies and after 30 day there is no coverage . As to buying a 6 month policy you can still pay monthly and have a grace period on your billing before it cancels your insurance card will say 6 month on it and you do n't have to get a new insurance card every month . I do not know if any other carrier offers this . I would check with hallmark if that is the type of policy you are looking for you can find them at hallmarkinsco.com hope that helps
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That really depends on what you can afford for your out of pocket expense . Many will say Higher deductible keeps your rates lower . Yes this is true to a point actually how much are you really saving . In Montana that average different if the premium is not that much . The difference between a $ 100 Deductible and a $ 1000 Deductible for comprehensive if only about $ 7.00 a month difference in rate . So Yes you are spending $ 7.00 more a month but in the event of a loss you are putting $ 900 less out of your pocket . Many glass shops will waive the deductible also so there many things to think about . 1St thing is do you have enough money laying around to cover the deductible amount / If you wreck your car and take it to the shop the insurance company will pay their portion but the shop will not release your car till you pay yours . Coming up with a $ 1000 maybe much harder to come up with . I would contact your agent and ask them how much a month difference it is in the rate before you jump in to conclusion . Be advised that agents that are posting answers to this question or any question are not to be posting there business information as your last person that answered the question did . You can reach the agent answering the question by the contact them button on the side . Hope this helps you with the information you need .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 per month in 2014 -LRB- this number can change each year -RRB- . The premium can be higher for individuals whose incomes are in the following brackets : If filing an individual tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- 107,001 - $ 160,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- 160,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a joint tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a married & separate tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 = $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If you want to review Medicare supplements to help cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- , contact an independent agent/broker to review Medicare supplement plans available in your zip code . If you would like assistance with your Medicare supplement program or have any other questions , you can send me a private message through the `` contact me '' button .
Medicare Part B has several enrollment periods that you should be aware of . The enrollment period that you may qualify for may vary based on what your current situation is . The first Medicare Part B enrollment period that most people experience is the `` Initial Enrollment Period '' . This is a 7 month window that starts 6 months before the first day of the month in which you turn 65 and lasts 6 months after the month in which you turn 65 . If you enroll in Part B using this enrollment period your medicare Part B will start on the first day of the month you turn 65 or if you enroll after your 65 birthday your coverage will begin on the first day of the following month . The Part B `` General Enrollment Period '' is for individuals over 65 that do not currently have medicare part B or other creditable health coverage . This period is from Jan 1st through march 31st every year . If you enroll in part B using this General Enrollment Period your Part B coverage will start on July 1st of the same year . There is also a `` Special Enrollment Period '' that begins 63 days before and ends 63 days after the date you lost creditable health coverage from an active employer . You may also qualify for an 8 month Enrollment period that begins on the day you lose employment and/or employment based group health coverage .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Cover Sinkholes ?
It is important to know that your Homeowners Insurance probably does not cover damage to the house caused by sinkholes unless you have discussed this optional coverage with your Insurance Professional and added the endorsement onto your policy . Damage caused by earth movement of any kind is a common exclusion in most standard Homeowners policies .
Homeowners insurance does not typically cover sinkholes . However , if your policy does cover sinkholes , it will be indicated on the declarations page of the policy . In TN , the law requires that sinkhole coverage is quoted as an option . Check with your agent if it is covered if you live in an area that has had sinkholes in the past .
I suggest you start by listing all the insurance you are now buying ; auto , tenants or home insurance , health , disability , life , etc. . The list should include a basic outline of the coverage , the insurer or agent and the annual premium . The information on this list may point you in the right direction . I would first consider insurers/agents you are currently doing business with if you are at all satisfied with them.If not , maybe you should be looking for more than just home insurance . Request limits , coverage and deductibles consistent with what you currently purchase.If you have all-risk coverage on your car -LRB- comprehensive and collision -RRB- , I would suggest considering all-risk coverage on your home and other personal property you own . If you have $ 300,000 liability limits on your car , you may want to consider similar limits on your home . Deductibles should be consistent whether they are car , home or medical and represent the amount of risk you are willing and can afford to assume . Features I like to see in home policies include : All-risk * coverage on the home AND personal property , GUARANTEED Replacement cost of your home , consistent liability limits and deductibles . In some locals , you have to be concerned with the perils of Flood , earthquake , sinkhole damage and wind as standard policies limit coverage in these areas . It 's common to look for the least expensive policy but it 's also important to have the RIGHT policy . An insurance policy is just a very expensive piece of paper until you happen to need it .
The section of the policy that will likely answer the question the best will be found in the `` Exclusions '' . In the ISO Homeowner Form 3 -LRB- HO3 -RRB- policy , emulated by most insurers if not used directly , and the most common form of homeowner insurance issued in the USA , is the form I take this information from . It says : Collapse , Settling , subsidence , earth movement -LRB- unless endorsed otherwise -RRB- , landslide , mudslide , mudflow , sinkhole , or any other impact of the earth sinking , rising or shifting that impact the foundation structure , walls , footings or floor are specifically excluded . An exception is made for the impact of losses caused by fire but only to the extent caused by the fire . In other words , if a fire ensues and the building eventually collapses , it is covered to the extent the damage was caused due to the damage of fire . There are certainly regional exceptions . In Ohio , due to past mining activity , subsidence has to be offered in various counties -LRB- but does not need to be purchased -RRB- . Florida has a problem with sinkholes and may have state mandated coverage changes . California has issues with earthquake and almost certainly requires at least the offer of earthquake insurance . Check with your local insurance representative for the advice that fits your particular locality .
There are a number of features I look for in home insurance coverage but my main objective is to have a balanced insurance program . Usually homeowners also own vehicles , have some form of health insurance , life insurance and even disability insurance . Home insurance should be consistent with other coverage you purchase . And it is not a bad idea to combine coverage with the same insurer whenever possible . Its better to deal with someone you already know if you trust them than a stranger simply trying to sell you something . I like to see all-risk * coverage on your home and your personal property . Most policies provide only limited coverage on personal property . I like insuring agreements that say , Any accidental direct damage is covered unless specifically excluded or limited . An insurance policy is easier to understand if you know what you are not covered for . Perils like flood , wind , earthquake and sinkholes may deserve special consideration in certain areas . Id also watch for limitations on certain property like jewelry and silver . I like to see guaranteed replacement cost coverage on the structure and replacement cost on personal property . Deductibles and liability limits should be consistent with those you purchase on your cars .
Generally speaking no , it does not . This is because most Homeowners Insurance policies include a specific exclusion for damage to your home or personal property caused by earth movement . Talk to your Insurance Professional about your policy and ask about amending it to include this coverage . In most cases you will find that this can be easily done . Once amended , your policy would cover for damage caused by sinkholes or other earth movement .
There are 3 policy forms for property insurance . Basic , Broad and Special . Basic will cover , Fire , Lightning , Windstorm or Hail , Explosion , Smoke , Vandalism , Aircraft or Vehicle Collision , Riot or Civil Commotion , Sinkhole Collapse , Volcanic Activity . Broad will cover all of Basic plus falling objects , weight of ice , sleet or snow , and accidental water damage . Special will cover everything that is not specifically excluded . If the policy does not exclude the coverage you are covered . Common exclusion are government action , nuclear hazard , war and military action , flood , fungus and pollution . Special Form gives you the broadest coverage 's . Now with special form you have a choice of an HO3 or an HO5 An HO3 is named perils for personal property and HO5 is open perils minus exclusion for personal property . While HO3 is the most common policy purchased the HO5 is the broadest coverage you can get in a homeowners policy .
It is important to know that your Homeowners Insurance probably does not cover damage to the house caused by sinkholes unless you have discussed this optional coverage with your Insurance Professional and added the endorsement onto your policy . Damage caused by earth movement of any kind is a common exclusion in most standard Homeowners policies .
An insurance company may choose to not renew your policy for a variety of reasons . If the condition that caused the decision to non-renew is corrected , it is likely that the company or another company will assume the risk . There are companies that specialize in distressed property risks and will take on some very difficult properties . However , if the company non-renewed because your house is about to be lost to a natural condition such as erosion of a mountain , a sinkhole , or similar condition , you are unlikely to find anyone interested in insuring your home .
Your Homeowners Insurance policy provides coverage for a wide range of perils . It is best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions , and any limitations included in your policy . It is safe to say that in general , there are two perils that your Homeowners Insurance wont cover namely loos due to earth movement and loss due to flood . In most cases , coverage for earth movement -LRB- sinkhole , earthquake , mudslide etc. -RRB- can be endorsed onto your policy . Flood Insurance , however , must be purchased separately .
You really need to talk to one or more independent agencies in your area to get pricing quotes . Quite a few key factors are involved in determining the homeowner pricing of each dwelling . Just to provide some examples within the process , the following are some of the key -LRB- but not all -RRB- factors in the rating process : Age of dwelling & construction type Protection - Alarmed for both break-ins & fire ? How is security system monitored ? Location - How close is fire protection ? Sinkhole frequency area ? Severe storms exposure ? Specific risk factors on premises and within the dwelling - types of animals , trampolines , swimming pools , pool enclosures , safety features for pools
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
There is no similarity between Home Warranty and Home Insurance except the word ` Home ' ! The purpose of a Home Warranty contract is for a homeowner to enjoy a warranty for covered appliances in the home ; the warranty provides assurance that covered appliances will be repaired or replaced . There are usually options available ; for instance , an Air Conditioning Unit orSwimming Pool Equipment may be available as an additional endorsement . Home Insurance on the other hand is necessary to provide the sudden and accidental loss to the dwelling from covered perils namely Fire , Lightning , Hail , Wind etc. ... Home Insurance does not provide the warranty of home appliances from break down or normal wear and tear . For example , in the disastrous event of a house fire , the homeowners insurance will provide coverage to rebuild the home and replace appliances that were damaged in the fire . This example is simply meant to aid the understanding of the difference between a home warranty and a home insurance policy ; none of the above will supersede a consumer contract issued by an insurance carrier or home warranty company .
Home Insurance may cover appliances in home ; there are 2 types of appliances , those that are fitted and those that are free standing . Fitted appliances constitute part of the Dwelling Coverage on the home insurance policy , whereas , free standing appliances may be covered under the Personal Property Coverage on the home insurance policy . The perils covered under a home insurance policy must be reviewed regarding the damage to the appliances . For example , Fire , Smoke , Lightning & Water damage may be covered on the policy which would also carry forward to the appliances . Regarding free standing appliances , the policy must afford coverage for Personal Property . If this question was intended for the reason of upkeep and maintenance of appliances , home insurance policies are not intended to repair or replace appliances due to maintenance and/or breakdown . Home insurance is intended for sudden and accidental losses which could cause financial hardship to the homeowner . If you wish to cover your appliances , you may wish topurchase a Home Warranty Contract from a small handful of carriers who offer a maintenance contract ; in this case , you will pay an annual premium as well as a Service Charge for each call when a repair company is dispatched to take care of a covered maintenance situation . If your question was indeed regarding perils covered on a homeowners policy , you may wish to contact your local agent and review the coverage on your policy or WEBSITELINK and we 'll be happy to review your coverage for you at no charge .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Homeowners Insurance and Title Insurance are not the same . Title insurance is insurance to make sure the title of the home is clean . For example you are purchasing a home from Mr. Doe . The title company is to make sure all information is accurate such as who is the seller , boundaries are correct and so on . If you purchased the home from Mr. Doe and you find out later there also was a MS. Doe who says I never gave permission to sell the home now there is a problem and title insurance would step in to cover this situation . Homeowners insurance is what you purchase to cover your actual dwelling and property , liability etc. . . for a potential loss .
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
health-insurance
Why Was My Health Insurance Application Denied ?
If you applied for Health Insurance and your application was denied , the company you applied to will have to give you a reason why it was denied . They should mail you a letter stating a reason . Since the Affordable Care Act was passed you can not be denied based on your health history , so as long as you are providing truthful , relevant info on the app , getting health insurance should be easy .
If you applied for Health Insurance and your application was denied , the company you applied to will have to give you a reason why it was denied . They should mail you a letter stating a reason . Since the Affordable Care Act was passed you can not be denied based on your health history , so as long as you are providing truthful , relevant info on the app , getting health insurance should be easy .
Life insurance policies are rarely voided . There is a specified period , normally two years , during which the company can deny a death claim if it is determined that the applicant made false representations on the application . I chose the word representation deliberately . An applicant is only bound by their personal knowledge and is therefore not responsible for any diagnosis made after the application is taken . The answers to questions are based upon the knowledge of the applicant not the actual state of affairs . One of the symptoms of alcoholism is denial and if the applicant does not believe themselves to be an alcoholic and no medical professional has diagnosed them as being an alcoholic , the insurance company would be hard pressed to ever deny a claim in the first two years . After the first two years pass the company can not deny a claim .
Are you asking in reference to whether setting up a group health plan can be denied or can a claim by someone under a group health plan be denied ? Setting up a group health plan is considered guaranteed issue , but typically certain requirements are necessary to do so . For guaranteed issue status , most companies would require at least 10 people to be active under the plan -LRB- some may go to 5 as a minimum -RRB- . Whether you 're viewed as a small business or large business is essential to understand as well as they require different things for underwriting and the programs available feature varying benefit structures . Group health insurance quotes can vary greatly on these and other factors such as type of plan -LRB- HSA , HMO , PPO , etc. -RRB- - there are no online instant quotes for this type of coverage . These types of quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- although some states may not require medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance . To secure a quote , you will need to consult with a health insurance agent -LRB- with a background in group health insurance -RRB- . I would suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare options from multiple companies . In regards to the second part of my initial clarification question , if you 're asking whether a claim can be denied if you belong to a group health plan , the answer is yes . A claim can be denied just like an individual plan if the service completed was not deemed to be medically necessary -LRB- e.g. elective cosmetic surgery -RRB- . It 's important to review the benefits under your health plan . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group who has a strong background in group health plans . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
If you were denied , health insurance the question we must ask is why were you denied coverage ? Depending on the reason and/or reasons why you were denied coverage , the next steps that you would take would be to look to obtain coverage through a different carrier or seek out a guaranteed issuance plan .
There are any number of reasons why a carrier would deny your health insurance application . Most carriers do not issue coverage to those who are in the country illegally . If you are incarcerated or employed in a hazardous occupation you may be denied health insurance . The most common reason is the cost of your health care is more expensive than the carrier is allowed to charge to cover the risk .
Unfortunately , the Affordable Care Act does not make it easier to buy a Medigap Plan . If you have a pre-existing health condition , the insurance companies can turn you down . Therefore , the best time to buy a Medigap plan is when you think you do n't need one . If you are over 65 and out of your initial Open Enrollment Period , you will have to answer the health questions on the Medigap application . Each insurance company is unique with their health questions -- as is each person with their health history . While one insurance carrier might deny you for having rheumatoid arthritis , another insurance company may approve your application . That is why it 's a great idea to work with a Medicare Supplement specialist . In just a few minutes , we can review your health history and determine which insurance companies may be the best match for you . If I can assist you with your personal Medigap needs , please feel free to contact me .
Assuming that all the cards are on the table and the agent really knows what they are doing , declines should not happen too often . But even in that case , here are some reasons people can be denied life insurance . 1 -RRB- Medical reasons that even they may not realize or think about when they talk to their agent . E.g. . The applicant takes two medications for depression , which is insurable . But when the underwriter looks at the medical records , they find that the patient has recently expressed suicidal thoughts to their psychiatrist , and the policy is denied . 2 -RRB- Insufficient medical information . E.g. . The underwriter wants to see the results of an MRI and no one can find it . 3 -RRB- Tobacco with a serious health condition that is impacted by smoking . E.g. Someone says they quit smoking when they had a heart attack a year ago , but then tobacco is found in lab results . 4 -RRB- Financial reasons . E.g. . The applicant is in the middle of bankruptcy proceedings , has a very poor credit rating , and owes back taxes . Rather than calling this a decline , it is often called a postponement . 5 -RRB- Wrong product . This is the most common reason for decline I hear about when people come to us after being declined elsewhere . They were just told to apply with a product that clearly does not work with their health and personal details . That is a completely avoidable reason for being denied . As you can see by the examples above , some people would be better off going with a No Exam policy to lessen their chances of being denied . Others are better off using medically underwritten coverage . Using an agency that specializes in taking cases declined by others can help you get an approval the first time .
In New York State a life insurance company can deny a claim if the insured commits suicide during the first two years of the policy being in force . The suicide exclusion period varies from state to state , but you can easily find the specifics for your state by going to your states insurance department web site . There is precedent for an insurance company to deny a claim even after the standard two year contestable period in the case of fraud . Part of the reason for the limitation on the contestable period is to protect the insured from having his claim denied for a relatively minor misstatement on the application . However the intent was never to reward fraudulent activity . An example of fraud would be a person who knows he is HIV positive but does not disclose it on the application , then he has a friend stand in his place for the exam and blood test . Even if the insured dies after the contestable period the company can deny the claim if they can prove fraud .
Life insurance is denied when the applicant does not qualify for the policy they applied for . This is also called a decline . Using an experienced agent can greatly reduce your chance of being denied , especially when you have a health condition or other risk factors . Far too many declines happen simply because the applicant was misled or did not read the fine print . Talking to a trusted agent and being upfront with them is your best defense against being denied for life insurance .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Whether you will be denied life insurance or not depends on a number of factors even if you are denied life insurance at standard rates you do have options . some companies offer guaranteed or easy issue insurance . I suggest you would work an experienced independent insurance broker . The broker can submit a trial application without jeopardizing you application with other companies . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
You can buy a Medigap Plan at any time during the year as long as you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have Original Medicare Part A and Part B , you may want to consider buying a Medigap policy sooner rather than later . Original Medicare only covers generally 80 % of your medical costs , leaving you to pay the other 20 % -- as well as the Part A deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 in 2014 -RRB- and the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The best time to buy a Medigap Policy is during your initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only , 6 month window when Federal law allows you to buy ANY Medigap Plan sold in your state -RRB- . During this period you can not be denied coverage . If you already have a Medigap Plan , you can buy a policy whenever you wish . You will just have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . Your application will have to approved through the medical underwriting department . It 's important to note that the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap Plans . If you have some health conditions , a Medicare Supplement Specialist can work with you to see which insurance companies might be good match for you . In some cases , you may have a Guaranteed Issue Right to purchase a Medigap Policy if you have other health care that changes in some way -- for example , you lose other health care coverage . This means you 'll get a small window of opportunity to purchase a Medigap Plan without being denied coverage . It ' s best to contact an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to help you determine if you are in this type of situation . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can assist you with your Medigap insurance needs .
Like the previous agents noted , depending on your enrollment status and any qualifying events , you may be able to get a Medigap Plan Guaranteed Issue ... which means you ca n't be denied . Outside of that , you 'll have to answer health questions on the insurance application . That is why it 's important to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . Independent agents are not employed by the insurance companies , but instead work for you . This is very beneficial because we have access to numerous insurance companies . The health questions with every company are unique ... as is each individual person . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
That is a great question ! A better one is why were you denied ? There are extremely few reasons why you could be legally denied , and I 'd sure like to know what their reason was . If they said `` pre-existing condition '' , you do n't want to insure through them anyway , as they are breaking the law , and probably are n't very trustworthy in their other dealings either . Count them as doing you a favor , and reapply with a different company , preferably one under the www.heathcare.gov site , where you might even qualify for help paying for the policy you 'll get . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
The reason the claim is being contested is because the carrier has a right , and a duty to its policyholders , to make sure that the application was accurate and information it contains did n't materially misrepresent the health or history of the insured . People do resort to different moral standards when faced with the end of life without adequate financial resources for their family members . And , agents may not provide the best guidance while assisting in application completion . Once submitted , however , underwriting a new application is usually thorough and methodical . Within two years though , when a claim occurs within the contestable period , there are enough reasonable questions about the health and condition of the insured that these issues are revisited as a matter of due diligence . That is why the contestable period exists . Claims laws in every state do not give the carrier the discretion to drag their feet and they must generally act on the claim within a reasonable period after it is presented . My experience is that the benefit is paid within 60-90 days or sooner if the application was accurate and all known issues were admitted and acknowledged on the application -LRB- when the cause of death is not in dispute -RRB- . Nevertheless , it is a difficult time to be asked to wait for the policy proceeds . It has been my experience that the delay is usually reasonable and almost always results in a death benefit being paid . When challenges are found to the veracity of the application , it becomes more complicated and these increase the chance that all that will be paid is the premium and interest and not the life insurance benefit . That is a rare event , on average . However , insurance companies can not be asked to pay for claims on individuals when their condition would not have been accepted and a policy issued . To conceal material fact is a reason any contract can be voided and life insurance is just another form of contract , in the end .
That is a great question ! There are extremely few reasons why a health insurer could deny you coverage , and the best one would be a poor payment history with them on your part . Health insurers can not deny you coverage for any health condition that you may have , that unfortunate practice was banned by President Obama 's Affordable Care Act legislation -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- . I hope that helps - thanks for asking !
Why do people get denied life insurance ? The biggest reason that people get denied is because the policy they applied for is not one that they qualify for . They may not qualify because their health , their age , or even their income does not fit the guidelines for that policy . The sad thing is , many declines could be prevented by visiting with knowledgeable agents who understand what products best fit each person 's situation . And many less people would be declined if they would answer the agent 's questions without trying to hide things . Those things usually catch up with you in the end , so it is much less frustrating to get them all out in the open at the start and allow your agent to find you a policy that you indeed can get and not be denied .
It really depends on the State you are in . In California if someone loaned their car to a friend and the friend caused the accident the insurance policy covering the car that did the damage is responsible to pay the claim if they were at fault . However there may be exclusions on the policy that could deny coverage . Without really knowing more it 's difficult to say in your situation . If a claim is being denied I would ask specifically as to why it is being denied . You can fall back on your own insurance to cover the loss to your vehicle providing you have collision coverage .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What To Ask When Buying Life Insurance ?
Rather than questions I would suggest that you observe the following about the agent . Does this agent listen ? Does this agent offer sound financial advice ? Does this agent communicate clearly with you and the insurance company ? In the end the most important thing you will do is select the limit of coverage . Other aspects of the transaction are really incidental . Will this agent set up a plan to ease the transition for those you love in the event of your premature death ? Little else really matters .
When buying life insurance it is a good idea to ask the following : 1 -RRB- What guarantees does the policy offer ? a. Is the premium guaranteed not to go up , and if so , for how long ? b. Is the face amount guaranteed not to go down ? c. Is the interest rate guaranteed ? 2 -RRB- Are there any exclusions or caveats ? 3 -RRB- Ask questions about the type of policy you are getting if you are not acquainted with it . 4 -RRB- Ask the rating of the company . 5 -RRB- Ask what options are included and what can be added on as riders . a . If Term , is the policy convertible ? b. Can the policy be extended ? c. Can I borrow from it ? 6 -RRB- If permanent insurance , inquire about charges . 7 -RRB- Ask if that agent will be around to assist you with customer service in the future .
When buying Disability Insurance , ask if it will pay you a benefit if you are unable to perform your own job , or any job . The feature is called `` own occupation '' . Purchase the policy that will allow you to collect if unable to perform your own occupation , if you can afford to do so . Ask if it will pay for `` partial '' or `` residual '' disability . Residual benefits are more comprehensive than partial . Ask if it is guaranteed renewable or non-cancellable . Only non-cancellable locks in premiums . Ask how long the coverage will last . You want it to last to age 65 , if you can afford it . Ask how long the elimination period is . You will need to have that much in reserves to get you through that waiting period until your benefit kicks in . Ask about the rating of the company . You want a secure company to make sure your benefit is paid if needed . Ask if it includes a cost of living rider and/or a rider that will allow you to get an increase in coverage in the future . Both will help your policy keep up with your career and inflation . Ask if there are any exclusions . There are other questions you could ask , but those cover some important things to look at when buying Disability Insurance .
Some questions you might ask when considering life insurance are : 1 -RRB- What is the rating of this company ? 2 -RRB- Are the rates guaranteed not to go up ? 3 -RRB- Does this policy have cash value ? If so , please show me an illustration . 4 -RRB- Will you be working with me if I need any assistance with my policy in the future ? 5 -RRB- What happens when the terms ends ? -LRB- if buying Term insurance -RRB- 6 -RRB- What riders are available for this policy ? 7 -RRB- How do I borrow from this policy ? -LRB- if buying Whole or Universal Life -RRB- 8 -RRB- What policy has the best rates for my health ? 9 -RRB- May I also get coverage for my spouse ? 10 -RRB- What if I want to drop this policy in the future ? There are many other questions you could ask , but these are some common ones that people ask me . This assumes you know how much coverage you need , and what type . Otherwise , those are also questions you will want to discuss with your agent .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
When buying life insurance it is a good idea to ask the following : 1 -RRB- What guarantees does the policy offer ? a. Is the premium guaranteed not to go up , and if so , for how long ? b. Is the face amount guaranteed not to go down ? c. Is the interest rate guaranteed ? 2 -RRB- Are there any exclusions or caveats ? 3 -RRB- Ask questions about the type of policy you are getting if you are not acquainted with it . 4 -RRB- Ask the rating of the company . 5 -RRB- Ask what options are included and what can be added on as riders . a . If Term , is the policy convertible ? b. Can the policy be extended ? c. Can I borrow from it ? 6 -RRB- If permanent insurance , inquire about charges . 7 -RRB- Ask if that agent will be around to assist you with customer service in the future .
To get life insurance on your mom , sit down with her and ask her what medications she takes , her height and weight , what health conditions she has had in the past and currently . Ask her what she wants to spend , or if you are the one who will be paying for it , ask her what amount she would like to see you get for her . It will seem less intimidating if she has a say in it . Then contact a website or agency for a quote . If you are getting it for final expense purposes , you will want to get a permanent policy . When getting life insurance on someone else , it is usually best to buy a No Exam policy , if you can . Your mom may have to do a phone interview to be approved . They will draft the first premium from your or your mom 's checking account when she is approved , and her policy will be in force .
When to buy permanent life insurance ? That is a good question . Some agents recommend buying permanent life insurance for every policy . Some financial consultants recommend never buying permanent life insurance . Both have some valid justifications , but both are rather extreme positions . In real life , with budget limitations , health risks , bear markets , and other considerations , it is hard for me to recommend only one option . Not everyone can afford all the life insurance they need in permanent coverage . Yet buying only term presents the risk of being unable to qualify for a new policy when the current one expires . Putting money in the stock market and savings plans should cover final expense needs , eliminating the need for permanent life insurance . But will those investments and savings be there when you die ? My recommendations are to buy Term insurance for temporary needs , and Permanent insurance for lifelong needs . Specifically , permanent insurance is best for final expense needs such as funeral , burial , paying off credit cards , and other costs associated with putting the deceased to rest . Permanent insurance is recommended if you want to use the policy proceeds to pay estate taxes , pass money to heirs , or bequeath money to a charity . If you use term insurance for any purpose that may find you `` outliving the term '' , you may find that you no longer qualify for a new policy , and that all your plans for your life insurance are moot .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
The reason is just liked mentioned above . To see if they will get paid and how responsible are you . I have this questioned asked when someone is looking for full coverage and what surprises is the everyone check your credit . Buying an I phone ? Buying a car ? Leasing a Car ? Renting an Apartment ? Buying a home or condo ? Asking for a Loan ? . So out of everything i just mentioned the only thing that pays out in the event of an occurrence is Insurance . So why would n't they check your credit ? Remember when your asking for a quote online or over the phone and they say `` we have to run a financial responsibility check '' that 's a soft check that the company is doing . Almost every carrier that i represent now and have represented across five states in the past check credit . My suggestion to you is let the agent or company know if that the issue so they can tell you upfront if you qualify or not . Thank you and good luck .
That is a great question ! The best way to choose a policy is to do two things : Your homework , and the legwork . Ask around family and friends and see what they did , or did n't do when choosing theirs . If a family member has a similar sized home , ask what their policy covers , and costs . Have a good idea what the value of your things are - have serial numbers , models and makes , even pictures of things to establish value . Get comparable prices . List everything - clothes , appliances , lamps , everything that you would have to replace . Some companies , like State farm , will have a program that can help you do this , and store the information for you . Then do the legwork - find a good agent , and compare prices . Talk about deductibles , and replacement value . When you are comfortable , then buy . If you need help , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Yes , more than likely you can , just like you can buy many insurance products on line . There are certainly arguments to be made for buying insurance that way and many major companies are including a `` direct line '' purchase option along with the more traditional distribution of products through a local licensed agency force . I know I myself am a licensed Professional Insurance adviser so I am biased , but it seems to me that we need to focus on what exactly we are buying when we make an insurance purchase . Sure , a policy is a document and a price is charged for what it represents , but i am convinced that most of us buy these things expecting that we 'll never have to use them , Hence the natural inclination to buy the cheapest . My opinion is that there are reasons to start your search on line , but talk to your local Insurance Professional for sound advice before buying anything .
When youre asking what insurance do you need when you retire , we need to know if youre asking about Health Insurance or are you talking about protecting your family from loss . If your question pertains to your health insurance because most of us loose that when we retire then you have two options . You can look at either a Medicare Supplement , which works similar to car insurance and what I mean by that is you can buy a plan with no deductible and pay a higher premium , that will cover all of your doctor and hospital expenses or you can assume part of the risk and pay a lower monthly premium with a deductible or co-pay and it will still cover your doctor and hospital expenses . Medicare Supplement will run you anywhere from $ 155 to $ 200 per month so around 2-3 thousand dollar per year to see your doctor 4 to 5 times a year . Some people like this option because their monthly cost is set even when they have a bad health year . The other option you have is to look at a Medicare Advantage plan if its available in your area . Most plans have either low or no monthly premium and small co-pays when you see your doctor or are hospitalized . All plans have a maximum out of pocket to protect you for bad health years so if youre like the average senior and you see your doctor the 4-5 times a year , your health insurance cost will run you under $ 100 . If you were asking about insurance to protect your family from loss then the answer get more complicated because we have to look at what insurance you already have in place , if you have a pension are you looking at taking a full or partial , do you have a 401K , if married when is your spouse going to retire and if it would be better to take their social security now or wait . With out knowing the answers to some of those questions answering that question would just be a blind shot in the dark .
If you are considering term insurance please ask yourself these questions . How old am I ? If I buy 20 year term now how old will I be when I have to buy another policy ? Does it meet your needs to buy term life considering the objective of the policy ? The purpose of term has always been to allow the purchaser to invest the difference between the cost of term life and permanent coverage . How much are you `` investing '' now ? Every policy you have means you are paying `` administrative costs '' for that policy . What if you have one good size permanent policy purchased at your current age to meet all your life insurance needs or can you buy a term life and then be able to meet your financial objectives and not have to buy another life insurance policy ? Finally , you need to have a personal advisor that puts your needs first and has the integrity to make recommendations based on your TOTAL financial plan and not some life insurance agent pedaling life insurance
That is an excellent question ! You should start by contacting your agent , and asking what the surrender value of the policy is . Ask if there are any charges or fees that would be applied , and what the balance payable to you would be . If that amount is what you hoped it would be , ask for a surrender form , and send it in after filling it out . However , if it is just a matter of paying too much , ask to reduce your coverage amount , or how much paid up insurance your policy would convert to . If it is just a matter of needing some quick cash , you might consider taking out a loan as opposed to ending the policy . Again , ask your agent for some help before you do anything , okay ? Thanks for asking !
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
This is a great question that I was just answering last night with another client . The first and foremost thing that you should look for is an agent . Even though much of the world buys insurance over the phone , a local agent can help you determine what types of coverage you want and need and is familiar with the local area . Being familiar helps in determining the reconstruction cost vs the selling price vs the tax value . All three numbers are usually different . Most people do not want to be either under or over insured , and a local agent will help with that . The second thing to look for is the company writing the policy . You will never know how good your insurance is until you need it . When a minor claim happens typically every insurance company will be able and willing to pay the claim . It is when the catastrophic occurs that you really get what you pay for . Thousands of dollars and many hours can be wasted when your insurance company is unwilling to agree with you . This is also another reason to have local agent representation . Third and finally is look at what other coverages are available and discuss whether or not you want to buy those coverages or self insure . Some of my favorite must haves are : replacement cost on contents , increased construction costs and replacement cost on the home itself , a deductible that you can afford to pay tomorrow if needed , sewer back up if you live downhill of anyone , A-rated carrier , and local claims personnel . There are many more topics that need to be discussed and reviewed which is why my # 1 recommendation on what to look for when buying home insurance is a great local agent .
That is an excellent question ! Absolutely it is cheaper to buy young ! I purchased policies for my kids when they were in preschool . Their monthly payments will never be more than the approximately $ 7 a month that they were when I purchased them . An added bonus in buying for your minor child ? Many companies offer the opportunity to add additional amounts of insurance without having any health questions . This can be a huge blessing , especially if your child has developed some illness that would otherwise deny them , or make the coverage prohibitively expensive . The other benefit of buying young is for the growth of the cash value . A policy purchased and left to grow for a couple of decades can have a sizable cash value , when you hit retirement age , and may need access to some extra money . By all means , buy young ! Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! The question is really not accurate though , it 's like asking why all dogs bite people . Not all dogs do , but the ones that do give them all a bad name . Are variable annuities bad ? They most certainly can be , if your risk tolerance is low , or your allocations made unwisely . Just like you would pick a dog that suits your needs and temperament , you should choose an annuity to suit you also . The risk in a variable annuity may not be right for you , but may suit someone else quite well . Please take the time to discuss what you are looking for with an agent that will listen , and take your concerns to heart . If they pressure you , or appear to be more interested in the sale than what you say , do n't buy , and send them packing . Annuities are not something that you can afford to buy without completely understanding what you 're buying . I hope that helps , please contact me if you need more information , okay ? Thanks for asking !
There are different schools of thought on how long you need life insurance . Some believe that you only need life insurance until you save up enough so that your dependents would do OK , even if your died prematurely . That philosophy is often called , `` buy Term , invest the rest . '' Those who like this idea tend to buy shorter terms and pay as little as possible for their life insurance , with the hopes that by the time their Term policy ends , they will not need to buy more . Some choose the age of retirement as their cutoff point for owning life insurance , with the intention of having all debts paid off and money for retirement saved up by then . On the opposite side of the fence are those who would use life insurance for a lot of their supplemental income and security in later life , and thus only buy permanent policies . Not only do they spend more on premiums than those who buy Term only , but they may even increase their premiums so that their policies are paid up by the time they retire . Many people fall somewhere in between . They buy what is most cost effective for each particular need . E.g. . They may buy Term for the bigger expenses in their lives , such as getting their kids raised . And they might buy a smaller Whole or Universal Life policy for their final expense needs . Then try to diversify their investments as is prudent at each stage of their lives , and in accordance with the economy , and products offered at that time .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Insurance Money Will I Get For A Totaled Car ?
When you and the adjuster agree on the value of your car , you will receive a check for that amount minus the deductible listed in your policy . If you are not at fault you will receive the same amount from your insurer but may recover the deductible after your insurance company subrogates against the at-fault driver .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
The simple answer is if the amount to repair your vehicle exceeds the market value of the vehicle then the vehicle will be considered a total . For example : If your vehicle has a market value of $ 5,000.00 and the damages are $ 5,500.00 the vehicle will be a total . If the same vehicle suffers damages of $ 4,500.00 the vehicle will be repaired . However if the damages get to close to the value of the vehicle the insurance company may elect to total the vehicle as there may be ongoing issues that can cost the insurance company more money . The insurance company will chose the option that costs the insurance company the least amount of money . Of course safety to the consumer is always an important consideration as well . I have seen vehicles with very low market values become totaled for a minor fender bender and I have seen expensive vehicles suffer major damage and still end up being repaired . If the damages can be fixed properly for a lower cost then totaling the vehicle , then this option is almost always the first option . Insureds will have very little say so in choosing to total their own vehicle as how damages are handled are written in the contract .
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
I love this question ! I have clients right now who pay more for collision coverage than they could ever collect on a total loss . It make no sense at all , it 's just what they 've always done . There 's a loose formula that I use in advising my clients about insuring an older vehicle . Look on KBB.com or Edmunds and get a rough idea of what your car is worth . Do n't use the `` clean retail '' . That 's completely unrealistic . Use the average trade or rough . It 'll be closer to the truth . Also check autotrader to get a range of what the cars are being listed for . Once you have a pretty good idea of what your car is worth , compare it to the cost of your physical damage coverage . If the cost of the coverage is more than 10 % of the value , you might consider dropping the coverage . That means that , in about 2-3 years , you 'd spend more than the value of the car . If you do have an accident , you get to make the decision on whether to repair the car or replace it . You 've already saved enough to do either -LRB- if you have n't spent your savings -RRB- . Bottom line , be aware of what your vehicles are worth and act accordingly . Spending money on coverage that would n't pay much does n't make a whole lot of sense . That 's not your agent 's place to decide for you , but we deal with it a lot and can make a suggestion . Find a good agent you can trust and go through the process . You 'll save money in the long run .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
That is a great question ! An auto insurance company will generally total your car when the cost of the repairs is near to , or exceeds , the approximate retail -LRB- Sometimes referred to as the `` Blue Book '' -RRB- value of the car . As the retail value is much lower in cars that are several years old , these cars are more likely to be totaled . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
This can vary of course , but generally speaking , and insurance company will determine a car to be a `` total loss '' if the amount of money needed to repair the damage exceeds the value of the car . A good rule of thumb is that if say the cost to repair your car is in the neighborhood of 70 % of the `` book value '' of that car , it is more likely that the company will total it . This is because in most cases , all of the possible damage can not be identified until the car starts being torn down .
The easiest way to come by a calculation on how much life insurance you will need comes down to three factors . First , do I need life insurance . Who would suffer if I died today financially ? Who depends on my income to live and who would assume any of my debts ? Second , what is the total of all of my debt ? Car loans , credit card debt and mortgage , how much to pay it all off today ? How much will I need for children 's education or their living expenses ? Third , take your current nurses salary times ten . Why ten ? The idea is to be able for your beneficiary to invest that amount and draw your replacement salary without touching the principle . Take those numbers and add them together along with the time period that all of that needs to be covered and you will have your face amount and term life years clearly set . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker to help you navigate the market and find you the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck !
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
You can always change insurance companies , there 's nothing to stop you . However , you may want to stick with what you have during a claim . Legally , an insurance company has to settle claims according to their policy whether you 're still insured with them or not . In practice , these are human beings working on your claim and they may not always give you consideration if you 've cancelled your coverage with them . Let 's look at an example . Let 's say you 've gotten into an accident and you 're car is in the body shop . You want OEM parts installed on your car , but the insurance company wants to use aftermarket parts because they cost less . They have more of an incentive to honor your request if you 're still insured with them because they see an opportunity to offset your claim with future premiums . Another factor to consider is the company you want to go to . They may not want to insure a car that has unrepaired damage . It 's totally up to the company . Now , in my experience , you would only ask the question if you do n't like how your claim is being handled . If you were totally satisfied , you would n't think about switching . My advice is to stay with your current company and negotiate with their claims department to get your claim settled to your satisfaction . Check your policy , all companies have an appeals process if you do n't agree with how your claim is being settled . Take advantage of it . You may get some consideration and a better settlement . If you 're still unsatisfied , you can always consider the courts , but this is a risky proposition unless you 're sure you 're in the right . After your claim is settled , you can explore new companies . A good agent will help you with claims if you 're not satisfied . They can not always ensure you 'll get what you want , but a good one will go to bat for you . In my opinion , finding the right advisor is the most important decision you make . In the long run , you 'll come out ahead even if they 're more expensive now . The cost of your coverage is n't just the premium , it 's what it costs you in time , money , and aggravation at claim time .
How much auto insurance is enough ? I once heard a story from a gentleman that may answer your question . He told me about an accident he had when he was younger . At the time of the accident he did n't own much and had very little in savings , so he was taking a chance by owning and driving a car without insurance . He figured sice he did n't own much and since the car was an old oil burner , he did n't need it . Then one day he was in a hurry and was trying to beat a yellow traffic light before it changed to red , when he clipped the front end of another car coming through the intersection in front of him . He said that when he came to , he checked himself out , then searched for the other driver . When he found that both he and the other driver were uninjured , he was thrilled . As he looked around more closely he found himself inside a building specifically a liquor store and was right in the middle of the Scotch aisle . When the dust settled the other driver had claimed only $ 15,000 to replace his car ... . but the store owner sued him for over $ 500,000 in damages to his store and contents . The judge awarded a total of $ 515,000 in a damage award and the old gentleman told me he was still working to pay off the judgement now 10 years later . The answer to your question is buy as much coverage as you can afford . Do n't be fooled by some auto insurace brokers when they try to sell you the state minimums as you could be paying for that cheap policy in the years to come !
That is an interesting question ! I want to make sure you understand what exactly you are asking , and what would happen , as it seems as if the agent you spoke with may have misunderstood you . You have 6 policies totaling $ 31k in face value . Without knowing how long you 've had them , let 's assume they are each at least a couple of years old . There are some things to be aware of here - taking reduced paid up coverage on 4 of them might seem like that would leave you with about $ 20k in coverage , but chances are it will actually be considerably less than that . How much coverage were you wanting to keep on yourself ? The second thing to be aware of is that you wo n't receive any money from taking the reduced coverage , only what you would have paid monthly on them . So again , understanding that I have no information on your policies to go on , let 's assume that they are all for $ 5k apiece and you pay $ 40 total a month in premiums . What you will gain from taking the reduced coverage is considerably less than $ 20k insurance for you , and $ 40 a month more money . Assuming that you are good with considerably less insurance coverage for yourself , and that your daughter 's policy can be purchased for less than that $ 40 a month , you are good to go . Since you are not surrendering any of the policies , there are no replacement issues to worry about , as you 're not replacing anything . There 's a whole lot more information that I would need to really steer you right , so maybe it would be wise on your part to contact someone other than whom you spoke with the first time , and get a better idea . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
I am not sure exactly what you mean by this question . My thoughts are that you are referring to a policy that will pay the excess amount if your car is totaled and you still owe more than the car is worth . For example , you owe $ 25000 on your car and it is totaled . The insurance company pays the book , which is $ 20,000 . Under some polices you are still on the hook for the balance , even though you no longer have the car . A policy that includes excess would pay off the car completely .
The amount can vary by car and company , but there is a gneral rule of thumb that is a pretty good guide . Usualy , a car is `` totalled '' when the insurance claims adjuster appraises the damage and compares the cost to repair with the `` book value '' of the car . There are various sources to determine the value of a car including , but not limited to , Kelly Blue Bookor the NADA guide as examples . Generally , if the cost to repair is about 70 % of the car 's value , it is likely that the adjuster will recommend categorizing the car as a total loss and will offer you a settlement sum that is in the neighborhood of the repair cost .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Is A Typical Home Insurance Cost ?
Home insurance is written for homes . Homes are never typical . It is the uniqueness that makes home ownership attractive . A homeowners policy is based upon the value of the home , the location of the home , the fire protection available , the age of the home and the condition of the home . In addition there are other items of interest that will guide an underwriter to evaluate the risk of your home
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
That is a good question . You should maintain as much insurance as it would cost to rebuild your home-including re-engineering the house & carting away debris . We typically calculate that using a per square foot amount . For example , in New York typical rebuild costs around ~ $ 150 per sq.ft of living area although that can vary widely depending upon the year built , quality of construction as well as number of bedroom , bathrooms , kitchens , style of home , garages , etc. . I would highly recommend you speak with an insurance professional to discuss your particular situation . Most insurance companies will require the agent fill out a home cost estimator . This is submitted with many applications for insurance and validates the amount the insurance broker feels it would cost to rebuild .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
-- > Normal 0 How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? I doubt anyone can give you the correct answer because the cost to rebuild your home will vary considerably depending on how it is damaged . If your home is the only one damaged in your area , for instance a fire in the home , the cost to rebuild will be one number . And if a number of homes in your area are damaged or destroyed , for instance a storm or wild fire , the cost to rebuild could be significantly more as materials , labor and contractors may be in short supply and cost much more . So how does one address that possibility ? Some , not all , insurance companies offer a Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost feature that can be added to your policy . Under this feature , you are required to purchase an amount of insurance consistent with the current cost to rebuild your home at normal prices . If your home needs to be rebuilt following a loss , the amount of insurance will automatically increase to whatever you need to rebuild the same home you had before the loss . That is the only way I know of to always buy the right amount of insurance , get one that adjusts to changing loss conditions . Otherwise , its just a guessing game and if you are wrong , you lose , not the insurance company .
Home insurance is written for homes . Homes are never typical . It is the uniqueness that makes home ownership attractive . A homeowners policy is based upon the value of the home , the location of the home , the fire protection available , the age of the home and the condition of the home . In addition there are other items of interest that will guide an underwriter to evaluate the risk of your home
The six categories are shown on a typical homeowners policy as coverage limits A-F . Coverages A-D are related to property insurance and Coverages E-F are related to liability insurance . Coverage A -LRB- Dwelling -RRB- applies to the coverage for the home , including any attached structures -LRB- e.g. , a garage -RRB- and permanently installed property -LRB- e.g. , hardwood flooring -RRB- . Coverage B -LRB- Other structures -RRB- applies to any detached structures on your property , such as a utility shed or detached garage . This limit is typically 10 % of the Coverage A limit with most carriers , but can be increased if needed . Coverage C -LRB- Personal Property -RRB- applies to coverage for your personal belongings that are other than the property described in Coverages A and B above . This limit is typically set at 60-75 % of the Coverage A limit depending on the carrier , but can be increased if needed . Coverage D -LRB- Loss of Use -RRB- applies if your home ever becomes uninhabitable due to a covered loss -LRB- e.g. , a fire loss -RRB- . It is there to provide for the living expenses associated with having to find temporary housing -LRB- apartment , hotel , etc. -RRB- . This limit is typically set at 20 % of the Coverage A limit with most carriers . Coverage E -LRB- Personal Liability -RRB- provides liability coverage for all of the people permanently residing in the home . Liability insurance provides coverage if you are legally responsible for an act that injures someone or someone else 's property . Coverage F -LRB- Medical Payments -RRB- provides coverage for medical expenses that result from injuries to others that occur on your premises .
There are many variables on what your home policy will cost . Depending on your state and what carriers you use . Also the value of your home and what it cost to replace it in the event of a total lost . I recommend that you talk to an agent and get a replacement cost value ran on your home this is not the same as an appraisal for you home when it comes to the purchase of a home . many time that has the land valued included and then you are purchasing insurance based on a value that is not correct . Most any agency can run a true replacement value on your home for free
In order to determine the proper protection on your home insurance carriers or more specifically the agents will runreplacementcost estimators on the home . Thereplacementcost estimator will determine what it will cost to rebuild a home in the event of a total loss . Thisfigurehas no bearing on what the market value of a home is . In California you see market values of homes ranging on average around $ 800,000 . However the actual construction cost to rebuild may only be $ 450,000 since land is not taken into consideration . The reverse can also be true . The market may have sunk in a given area so that same house is now only worth $ 200,000 on the market but it still costs $ 450,000 to rebuild since the cost of construction has not changed . Always have a discussion with your agent about the details of your home so a proper replacement amount can be determined and you are properly insured .
Typically , life insurance is of benefit to your loved ones . Many buy life insurance to make sure their loved ones are financially able to do the things they would have done if you were still around . That being said , many modern properly structured permanent life insurance products do have some benefits you can use while alive . These include access to cash and additional money if you ca n't to two of the six activities of daily life -LRB- typically how the need for long-term care is defined -RRB- to help cover some of the costs of in-home care , assisted living costs or nursing home costs . While not all inclusive of a list it is a good basis for your consideration . Hope this helps .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
This is a great question that I was just answering last night with another client . The first and foremost thing that you should look for is an agent . Even though much of the world buys insurance over the phone , a local agent can help you determine what types of coverage you want and need and is familiar with the local area . Being familiar helps in determining the reconstruction cost vs the selling price vs the tax value . All three numbers are usually different . Most people do not want to be either under or over insured , and a local agent will help with that . The second thing to look for is the company writing the policy . You will never know how good your insurance is until you need it . When a minor claim happens typically every insurance company will be able and willing to pay the claim . It is when the catastrophic occurs that you really get what you pay for . Thousands of dollars and many hours can be wasted when your insurance company is unwilling to agree with you . This is also another reason to have local agent representation . Third and finally is look at what other coverages are available and discuss whether or not you want to buy those coverages or self insure . Some of my favorite must haves are : replacement cost on contents , increased construction costs and replacement cost on the home itself , a deductible that you can afford to pay tomorrow if needed , sewer back up if you live downhill of anyone , A-rated carrier , and local claims personnel . There are many more topics that need to be discussed and reviewed which is why my # 1 recommendation on what to look for when buying home insurance is a great local agent .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
The first thing I recommend looking for is appropriate coverage . Your homeowners insurance should have enough dwelling coverage to cover not only the cost of rebuilding your home , but also cover the clearing and removal of debris is your home is destroyed . All too often , I see homeowners policies that ONLY cover the cost to rebuild . If you do n't have enough to clear the debris , you could get stuck with that cost yourself -LRB- and that cost is in the neighborhood of $ 30,000 ! -RRB- . If the cost to rebuild your home becomes MORE than your coverage , is there anything in place to help pay for that ? For example , Farmers Insurance will include an extra 25 % of the dwelling coverage . So , if your home coverage is $ 100,000 , and it ends up cost $ 125,000 to rebuild your home , Farmers Insurance would pay that amount -LRB- minus your home deductible -RRB- . The final thing I would point out would be the deductible . In many cases , if you have never had a claim , you can have a lower deductible . However , many insurance companies are moving to a higher deductible model -LRB- usually as a percentage of the dwelling coverage -RRB- . So , if your dwelling coverage is $ 200,000 , your deductible would be 1 % of the dwelling , or $ 2,000 . I recommend finding a company that offers a deductible you feel comfortable paying .
A home is typically the largest purchase one makes . And like most products in the marketplace , one can find a cheap home or an expensive home . The same goes for homeowners insurance . If you are trying to meet only a mortgage company 's requirement for insurance , you can go pretty cheap . If on the other hand you want an insurance company to pay for ALL the damages incurred in a claim , refurnish your home , put you up in another home while your home is being repaired , defend you in court when you have been sued , it might cost you a little more for your insurance . Your best bet to obtain the best value is talk to a professional to help evaluate your needs relative to your wants and budget .
Your homeowners policy should cover the amount it would cost to completely rebuild your home including re-engineering costs . It should be written on an insurance form that is considered `` All Risk '' . All risk coverage will not list what you are covered for , but rather , it covers everything that is not excluded . Typical exclusions include earthquake , flood , wear & tear , maintenance and intentional acts . You should cover your contents , or personal property , with a replacement cost endorsement . This will replace your items in your home rather than depreciate your personal property . Our office recommends at least $ 500,000 in Personal Liability coverage and Loss of Use coverage should you need to live somewhere else while your home is rebuilt or repaired . Hope this answers your question . You should check with your local independent insurance agent . They will help customize your policy for your unique needs .
what I think you mean by Legal cover is what we in the industry refered to as liability coverage . The reason it exists on a homeowners policy , is that it is protection most folks who own a home are at risk of needing . One develops an exposure typically by some form of negligence . So we in the US are empowered or constrained some by what we do that either creates a negligent action or by omission by creating a situation that by no action creates negligence.For example let me talk a bit about trees . Typically you can run the risk of causing harm to your neighbors if a tree on your property comes down on their house . In some states that would be viewed a negligent act in itself , but in other states you would have been required to have been warned by your neighbor of the potential danger in advance of the tree falling.Other mitigating factors will increase you propensity for being liable , such as the tree is dead . Those are some small ways we cause liability by some form of negligence.it may be easier to see negligence in driving but be assured there are many instances around a dwelling that can precipitate a legal liability for your self . Let me just give you a few to think about : your dog bites someone , a child secures a firearm and unintentionally shoots someone ; a visitor trips on the stairs you neglected to rid of ice , your son or daughter hits a baseball through a neighbors picture window , the child down the road jumps on your trampoline while you are not home , kids play in your pool without adequate supervision , your riding lawn runs over your neighbors foot . an on and on Keep a couple things in mind . Homeowners have coverage for various Perils -LRB- wind , hail snow etc -RRB- they all create hazards by the way the home is maintained , protected and secured . If you have a pool that is a creates a hazard of drowning . Without the pool there is little chance of drowning , so the hazards you create are ones for which there are often means to contain and yet the hazard still exist . You might have met the legal requirement to contain the space your pool occupies with a fence , but then negligently fail to lock the gate . so by your action or inaction you create scenarios for which you would be considered negligent and liable . The measure you should always use is what would a prudent responsible person do . If you follow that advise you may spend a few extra dollars , but you will avoid many unnecessary injuries and liabilities .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Difference Between A Variable Annuity And Variable Life Insurance ?
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement vehicle that allows the owner to choose from an offered selection of investments . When annuitized , it pays out a stream of income to the annuitant . The investments you choose for your variable annuity can increase or decrease in value and that means the overall value and your payout will follow . While a variable annuity can offer a nice upside , there is risk and if the investments inside the annuity decline in value , your payout will be decreased . A variable life insurance policy is a form of permanent life insurance offering a death benefit to your beneficiaries upon your passing . A portion of the premium you pay for a variable life insurance policy goes toward the insurance , a portion toward various investments that the owner of the policy chooses and a portion goes to cover associated fees related to the management of the investments . The variable life insurance policy owner will be given options for the investments , generally mutual funds . As the value of those mutual funds go up and down , the cash value inside your policy follows . There are many options to variable annuities and variable life insurance products that should be considered before purchasing .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
A non-qualified variable annuity accumulates tax deferred with access to the market . High tax bracket individuals could benefit from the tax deferral aspects of variable annuities . A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Variable annuities have performance records and risk assessments published through Morning Star .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
The variable annuity will make sense based on your individual needs and personal circumstances . This type of annuity is a contract between the insurance company and the insured -LRB- i.e. client or customer -RRB- . The insured pays one lump sum payment or may make other payment arrangements to the insurance company . Then , the insurance company agrees to make payments back to the insured at specific dates in the future . With the variable annuity , the client can receive monthly payments for the rest of his life . Also , this annuity protects you if you out live your assets . Variable annuities are also used to hedge against inflation . If you think you are going to live a long time , you should think about buying an annuity . Your beneficiary -LRB- i.e. children and other family members -RRB- may be able to receive the payments when you die . The variable annuity is tax-deferred . You do not pay taxes until you withdraw the money . Some variable annuities have a death benefit . Make sure you read the prospectus and ask a lot of questions . This type of investment is for the long-term and to help you meet your retirement goals and objectives .
What are the differences between fixed and variable annuities ? Well , the biggest difference would be the investment pool you work from . A fixed annuity investment choices are made by the insurance company and you receive a stated % return for that year . You do n't have to do anything . A variable annuity shifts the investment risk onto the individual and they , not the insurance company -LRB- to a degree -RRB- decide what the annuity will be invested in . The Risk shifts to the insured and while the possibility exists to outgain the fixed annuity , the possibility of loss , even loss of existing balance exists . A variable annuity REQUIRES attention to a much great degree than a fixed .
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement vehicle that allows the owner to choose from an offered selection of investments . When annuitized , it pays out a stream of income to the annuitant . The investments you choose for your variable annuity can increase or decrease in value and that means the overall value and your payout will follow . While a variable annuity can offer a nice upside , there is risk and if the investments inside the annuity decline in value , your payout will be decreased . A variable life insurance policy is a form of permanent life insurance offering a death benefit to your beneficiaries upon your passing . A portion of the premium you pay for a variable life insurance policy goes toward the insurance , a portion toward various investments that the owner of the policy chooses and a portion goes to cover associated fees related to the management of the investments . The variable life insurance policy owner will be given options for the investments , generally mutual funds . As the value of those mutual funds go up and down , the cash value inside your policy follows . There are many options to variable annuities and variable life insurance products that should be considered before purchasing .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
Product suitability is extremely important in selecting an investment , variable annuities are no exception . To determine if variable annuities are suitable , you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes your risk assessment , your effective tax bracket and your life expectancy . Generally , mid to long term investors with high effective tax brackets should consider tax deferred variable annuities . Keep in mind that the benefits of variable annuities come at a cost like all investments . So do the benefits outweigh the cost of tax deferred variable annuity ? There are so many tax deferred variable annuities to choose from and the selection process can be daunting .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
Variable annuities may be appropriate for a high tax bracket long term investor with a desire for market returns with an understanding of the risk . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities are classified as a security . Non-qualified tax deferred variable annuities have separate sub accounts using market equities and bond investments that can lose money and incur policy expenses . A personal financial profile needs to be created with a risk tolerance assessment before moving forward with the purchase of a non-qualified or qualified tax deferred variable annuities or the allocation of the separate sub accounts . Variable annuity policy expense loads can be a concern as policy expenses are paid out of deposits made into the annuity regardless of positive or negative performance . Variable annuities , like all annuities , are designed ultimately for generating income . You may want to consider purchasing an income rider that may offer guaranteed lifetime income .
A non-qualified , tax deferred fixed rate annuity is only as guaranteed as the contract provisions outline and is only as good as the annuity insurance company that issued the contract . That being said , many financial stable annuity insurance companies offer a non-qualified tax deferred fixed rate annuities , generally at 5 , 7 and 10 year periods . A non-qualified , tax deferred variable annuity is separate sub accounts which use equity and bond instruments in variable annuities . Because these accounts are market driven you can lose money . Currently the variable annuity feature of the income rider is attractive for investors with an established risk tolerance . There are many competitive variable annuity contracts available . ;
A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
Products , in and of themselves , dont present a good value or a bad value . Product suitability for each client is important . You need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review . A non-qualified variable annuity is a security and an insurance product that accumulates tax deferred with a guaranteed interest rate account and separate sub accounts with using equities and bonds . Variable annuities are generally expensive , so the value proposition has been called into question by many advisers . The inventory of variable annuities is significant and you may want to review the Morning Star reports on any variable annuity you may be considering . Variable annuities can lose money , so make sure your risk tolerance fits the product .
Product suitability for each client is important . You need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review . A non-qualified variable annuity is a security and an insurance product that accumulates tax deferred with a guaranteed interest rate account and separate sub accounts with using equities and bonds . Variable annuities are generally expensive , so the value proposition has been called into question by many advisers . The inventory of variable annuities is significant and you may want to review the Morning Star reports on any variable annuity you may be considering . Variable annuities can lose money , so make sure your risk tolerance fits the product .
You have a qualified variable annuity ? The `` qualified '' part means all monies contributed into this product are done so on a pre tax basis . An `` Annuity '' is a product that can be sold inside a qualified plan or outside . The difference between the two are the tax deferral on the original money you put inside it . Inside a qualified plan , you get a tax break on the money you put in . Non qualified means you pay taxes on the money you put in first . Later , during distribution a portion of the payout will be taxable income and a portion wo n't as you already paid taxes on it . Variable means the annuity , usually based in security products , will gain OR lose based on the investment decision the purchaser makes by their allocations and their market performance . Variable means more risk for the possibility of greater return basically .
Variable annuities are only good for people with a high level of risk tolerance . Variable annuities can lose money , as well as , gain money . Hence , the term variable . When looking at variable annuities make sure you understand the risks involved . There are some great agents that can help you decide if these investments are the best fit for your tolerance and situation . There are other annuities that do not pay as much interest but are safer . For example , some annuities offer `` floors '' . Every annuity has some pros and cons so just make sure you understand the contract .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Homeowners Insurance A Waste Of Money ?
People buy insurance because they can not bear the risk alone . Only a relatively small percentage of policyholders will incur a large claim in a given year , however , none of them could afford to bear that claim alone . Unfortunately I can not tell when you will have a claim and advise you to buy a policy because you will be having a claim soon . Actually most people buy a homeowners policy because their lender requires it , however , it is a very good deal , particularly if you do have that major claim .
That is a great question ! A lot of people have a hard time with the concept of insurance . I 'm young , nothing will happen to me ! Or I 'm a good driver , why do I need insurance ? But inevitably things do happen . You can be the best driver ever , but that does n't mean the teenager texting in the car behind you is ; or that something can go wrong , and you 're laid up in the hospital . Homeowners is the same way . No one thinks that things will go wrong with their house , why would I want it ? Insurance is there to protect you when things do go wrong . You would not think the insurance was a waste of money when you got the check to replace your belongings , or the one that allows you to pay for the hotel rooms that you are forced into when your home is damaged . Insurance is only a waste of money when you drastically undervalue it . Please consider it as protection , and not a waste . Thanks for asking !
There is one insurance policy that is guaranteed to pay a benefit and that is Life Insurance . Unless you have a mortgage that will require you to have Homeowners insurance , then if you have enough liquid resources -LRB- cash -RRB- to completely rebuild you home in the event it is destroyed then you probably do n't need insurance . If you have enough resources available to pay a lawsuit settlement , then you probably do n't need insurance . If you ca n't answer yes to both of those questions , then no , Homeowners Insurance is not a waste of money .
That is a great question ! I guess that you have to decide what a waste of money really means to you , to answer the question properly . If you did n't buy it , and something happened that destroyed all of your stuff , then you wasted all of the money that you spent to buy your stuff . With insurance , your stuff would be replaced , and the money not wasted . But if you bought it , and nothing ever happened , is the covering of that risk even though you did n't need it a waste ? That 's the answer to your question . Is security and peace of mind a waste of money to you ? Just a different way of looking at risk . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! A lot of people have a hard time with the concept of insurance . I 'm young , nothing will happen to me ! Or I 'm a good driver , why do I need insurance ? But inevitably things do happen . You can be the best driver ever , but that does n't mean the teenager texting in the car behind you is ; or that something can go wrong , and you 're laid up in the hospital . Homeowners is the same way . No one thinks that things will go wrong with their house , why would I want it ? Insurance is there to protect you when things do go wrong . You would not think the insurance was a waste of money when you got the check to replace your belongings , or the one that allows you to pay for the hotel rooms that you are forced into when your home is damaged . Insurance is only a waste of money when you drastically undervalue it . Please consider it as protection , and not a waste . Thanks for asking !
If you purchase Critical Illness Insurance and then never suffer a life threatening illness of the type that would cause a benefit to be paid by the policy , you probably would look at the policy as a waste of money -LRB- unless it was such a comfort to you to know those funds were there , that it was worth the premium for that peace of mind -RRB- . If you did collect on the policy , you would not feel it was a waste of money . It is very hard to answer that without knowing the future . But that is the nature of all insurance . It is protection against the unknown and the `` what if 's '' of life .
There is one insurance policy that is guaranteed to pay a benefit and that is Life Insurance . Unless you have a mortgage that will require you to have Homeowners insurance , then if you have enough liquid resources -LRB- cash -RRB- to completely rebuild you home in the event it is destroyed then you probably do n't need insurance . If you have enough resources available to pay a lawsuit settlement , then you probably do n't need insurance . If you ca n't answer yes to both of those questions , then no , Homeowners Insurance is not a waste of money .
Be frugal , try not to waste too much of your money on unnecessary things , buy what you can comfortably afford , pay off your credit cards and all of your other bills in full every month , put money away , and invest wisely . Time is a great friend for you because of the power of compounding interest . If you start saving money at a younger age , it can grow much more money in interest over those extra years and yield more money for you in your retirement years . It can be helpful to consult with a financial planner that can help guide you on managing your monies wisely . I would also recommend reading some books and articles that provide valuable tips on saving for retirement - there are a number of good ones out there . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance . In fact , she is the primary caregiver for her mother who lives with her in Florida . In an article written forSun Times Media , LLC , dated Sept. 4 , 2012 , she relates how difficult it has been taking care of her mother . Although Suze Orman had - and still has - the means from her business to take care of the costs of long-term care insurance , she reports that she tried and tried to get her mother to sign off on an LTCi application , but she refused to do it . Her mother said she would n't ever need it and that it would be a waste ofmoney . It costs approximately $ 25,000 / month for Suze to keep her mother at home and have the best quality care around the clock . That 's about average for 24/7 home care with skilled nursing . If Suze 's mom were to go into a Nursing Facility , the cost would be much less , but would still be from $ 7,000 - $ 12,000 per month , depending on whether she had a semi-private or private room . Suze indicated that as a young professional financial advisor , she saw `` clients who would spend all the money that they had earned over a lifetime on a long-term care stay . '' She advised that , `` If you can afford LTC insurance and you are in your early 50s or older , now is the time to look into getting it . '' But , she also cautions that if you ca n't , '' ... dont buy it because you will end up dropping it and wasting your money . '' She concludes her article with the irony of her own personal situation with regard to buying long-term care insurance . `` Over the years , I have had some health problems that are fine today . But , when I went to get my own LTC insurance policy two years ago I was denied for recent health reasons . If I had just gone one year earlier , that would not have been the case . '' -LRB- Suze Orman donated her fee for writing the article to Blue Planet Network , which aims to bring sustainable safe drinking water to people in rural communities around the world ; blueplanetnetwork.org . -RRB-
What retirement plan is right for you ? The right plan for you is going to be the one `` you '' actually do . Waiting around for perfect or the plan , simply wastes time . Wasting time is the biggest downfall for most people when it comes to retirements . Personally I do n't care if it 's a passbook savings account or a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or anything , if you fail to do anything , you simply wo n't have anything . There are many options both qualified and non qualified out there to choose from . Read up and pick one that works for you and that you WILL fund . In my profession I 've seen agents make fun of little old ladies with a couple hundred thousand in a savings account . They would comment on how stupid these ladies were ... Me ? I thought they were smart . Yea , sure lots of different things they could have done , but they saved and they saved some more . They had something because they saved something . It 's the habit of saving rather than the plan . Lots of people have `` plans '' with no money in them .
Like most other forms of insurance , you may not feel the premium is worth paying ... until you need it . Homeowners insurance is a total waste of money until you have a major insured loss . Medicare Part B covers much more than a doctor visit . Also covered are diagnostic tests such as MRI and CT scans as well as infusion therapy . Consider a Medigap to cover Part B deductibles and coinsurance .
Coverage A-Dwelling , on your declaration page is the amount of money your home is insured for against covered perils . How much should your limit be ? It should be the amount of money you need to rebuild your house from scratch . That amount of money is called Replacement Cost . How do you determine the Replacement Cost Value ? To determine the Replacement Cost Value , you need to know or measure the square footage of your home . You also need to know the special features of your home , like skylights , central vacuums , etc. . You also need to know the quality of your improvements . For example , are your kitchen and bathroom fixtures Builders Grade or Luxury ? If you can gather that information , call your agent and review it with them . They should be able to help you come up with a reasonable estimate of your homes replacement value . You should revisit the value every three to five years or after you make a significant improvement . You want to keep pace with your homes value , but you dont want to over insurance and waste money . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
Great question ! Unfortunately the answer is still kind of fuzzy . Depending upon who you listen to , it is either the death of medicare , or its best friend . The Government gave states the option of adding medicare coverage for millions of seniors who fell into the cracks , and offered to pay for a significant portion of it . Some states added it , and there were seniors who were finally able to get medicare , other states had different ideology , and passed . A major focus of the Act was to trim overblown costs and waste by providers -LRB- The savings in the waste recovery are to help fund the program , so there has been a big push for this -RRB- and make the charges more uniform across the industry . As a result , many providers either dropped or limited the services that they had previously provided . So there is a kind of `` on one hand '' answer so far to your question , and I guess it depends upon which side of the fence you sit as to whether it is helping or hurting . If your parent was able to finally get coverage , you would probably like it ; if you are a provider -LRB- or used a provider -RRB- who was making a tidy profit off of your medicare billing , who learns that wo n't be continuing , and drops the service , you probably do n't . This will be a great debate for as long as it takes for solid numbers and data to shake out and really be able to measure the success or failure of the act . I appreciate the opportunity to answer , thanks for asking !
The only time disability insurance is worth buying is when you become disabled . Otherwise it is a waste of money . The catch is no one knows when they can or will become disabled it is an absolute must in your financial planning . Statistically we are 8 times more likely to become disabled than to die at an earlier age . Disability insurance for those whose greatest asset is their ability to earn money is a must .
There are no government restrictions to owning a life insurance policy while you are on Medicaid . The main thing is to be sure your monthly premiums are affordable and in your budget . It does not make since to purchase a life insurance policy that in a few months or years you can not afford . This would be a huge waste of money . Good luck .
When you are healthy you have a natural tendency to feel that insurance is a waste of money . But if you are involved in an accident or have to go to the hospital for surgery and receive a hospital bill of $ 30,000 or more , which is not an exaggeration , you will quickly find out the need for health insurance . Without health insurance the hospital must treat you , but unless you have the financial ability to private pay , they will only get you stabilized and send you home . Unless you qualify for Medicaid you need health insurance . Under the Affordable Care Act you will be required to have health insurance or be penalized .
Re dual health insurance , if you are referring to two policies that both cover near-identical benefits , there would simply be no purpose to doing that , as it would be a waste of your money . If you are referring to covering two persons on the same policy -LRB- husband and wife -RRB- , then it can be done and is very popular .
Critical illness insurance is a special kind of health insurance policy . Once referred to as `` dread disease '' plans , someone finally wised up and decided to give them a different name . CI policies come in two flavors . One is a health insurance policy , the other is a rider to a life insurance policy . The policies normally pay a predetermined lump sum amount upon first diagnosis of a list of illnesses including cancer , heart attack , stroke , etc. . Read your policy carefully . Some are quite good but most are a waste of money .
What can I do to plan for retirement ? Get started saving , even if i 's passbook . Time is your biggest ally in retirement planning . More people waste that time trying to find the `` prefect '' retirement choice when really it is discovering the `` habit '' and `` discipline '' of saving money.Do not wait until you have found `` perfect '' , start saving , start learning and move funds from those saving into your different choices that you 've learned about . Is this a prefect plan ? No , it 's main goal is to get you saving money `` while '' you investigate your options .
Aside form all that Kelly said , here are some other things to consider ... Definitions are THE MOST important thing to consider in a DI policy ... You must understand : Total vs. Partial Disability Recurrent Total Disability `` Own Occupation '' ... -LRB- How long does that last -RRB- & much more . Disability has many moving pieces . It 's important to understand what you are buying . I have a great report called `` Stop wasting your money on Disability Insurance '' that you can have ... just reach out for a copy ... - gravy
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is The Best Medigap Insurance Company ?
Medigap Plans are standardized by CMS . This means they are Medicare 's plans and NOT plans of the insurance company -- so there is n't a company that ranks as the best Medigap carrier because they are all required to pay the bills ... it 's the law . As a consumer , it 's in your best interest to use an independent agent to help you determine which insurance company and Medigap Plan is the best for you . Independent agents specializing in Medicare know how to research the market and find the insurance company that meets your needs . When I 'm helping Seniors lower their existing Medigap premium , I let them know that it really does n't matter which insurance company they use ... if they have Plan F , it will be the same exact Plan F with another insurance carrier . The only difference is the price . Thank you for taking the time to read my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
The best medigap company is the one that 's offering you your desired plan at the lowest cost . A plan F from `` Company ABC '' is the same exact plan F from `` Company XYZ '' . Medigap plans are standardized , meaning that regardless of which company you have the plan through , the benefit pay the EXACT same way . The only difference in your coverage is your price . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best Medigap Insurance Plan will be specific to each individual 's needs . What is the best for one will not be the best for another . Medigap Plan F is the most comprehensive plan on the market but depending on your needs it may or may not be the best for you . The way to determine what is the best Medigap Plan for you is to contact a independent agent that specializes in Medigap Insurance . They will be able to evaluate your needs and help you match the best plan that meets those needs . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
The best Medigap Plan is the one that meets your needs . With that said , Medigap Plan F is widely touted as the best Medigap Plan . It 's very popular because it has the most comprehensive health care coverage of all Medigap Plans . Medigap Plan F covers all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance . As long as you pay your monthly premium , you will receive your Medigap Plan F benefits . Some would argue that Medigap Plan G is becoming the ` best ' Medigap Plan . It acts just like Plan F after satisfying the annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium for Plan G is often lower than Plan F. . . which is why many people like it . It 's a personal preference as to whether or not you want to pay the Part B deductible yourself -LRB- Plan G -RRB- or have the insurance company do it for you -LRB- Plan F -RRB- . Some of my clients do n't like to be bothered with paying any bills , so Medigap Plan F works for them . While I have other clients who would rather save money on their premium and do n't mind satisfying the deductible . If would like more information regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me . In a matter of minutes , I can provide you with information on Medigap benefits and quotes for your area .
My Blue Medigap is Medicare Supplement insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan . My Blue Medigap offers three Medigap Plans -LRB- A , F , N -RRB- through Blue Care Network . Medigap Plans A , F , N are standardized . The Medigap benefits from one company are the same exact Medigap benefits with another company -- the only difference is price . My Blue Medigap will have a different monthly premiums than other private insurance companies offering Medigap Plans A , F , N. It 's worth contacting an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can provide quotes in just a matter of minutes from companies you wo n't see online . We 'll do a side by side comparison showing you which company has the best Medigap price . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your specific situation .
Since all Medigap plans are standardized , the benefits are exactly the same with every insurance company . This means that Medigap Plan F with ABC insurance company is the exact same Medigap Plan F with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is price . Medicare does not regulate the price of Medigap Plans ... just the benefits . That 's why there is such a competitive market . Many Medicare Beneficiaries like the idea of purchasing Medigap through a well known insurance company , but that does n't mean you are going to get the best price . Medigap is not like health insurance for under age 65 where a Medical director approves or denies your bills . Medigap payments are made by the insurance carrier if it 's a Medicare approved item because they have to -- it 's the law . I suppose that was the long way of saying there is n't one insurance company that has the best Medigap coverage . They all offer the same standardized plans and pay the bills based upon CMS regulations .
Medigap Plan G is a standardized Medicare Supplement insurance plan designed to fill in the ` gaps ' that Medicare does n't pay . Medigap Plan G covers 100 % of the following after meeting the Part B deductible $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- : 1 . Medicare Part A Coinsurance and Medicare approved hospital costs 2 . Medicare Part B Coinsurance or Copayment 3 . Blood -LRB- First 3 Pints -RRB- 4 . Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Copayment 5 . Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance 6 . Medicare Part A Deductible 7 . Medicare Part B Excess Charges 8 . Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- While Medigap Plan G benefits are standardized , it is sold through private health insurance companies . This means any insurance company that offers Medigap Plan G is required by law to provide Medigap Plan G benefits . The only difference is price . ABC insurance company can charge a completely different premium than XYZ insurance company for the same exact Medigap Plan G. It 's best to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can shop the market for you . We have contracts with insurance companies that you do not see online . This is how we help our clients find low Medigap Plan G premiums . Afterall , Plan G is Plan G -- you might as well find the the plan with the best rate . Please feel free to contact me if I can assist you with your specific situation . In just a matter of minutes , I can provide you with quotes for Medigap Plan G in your area .
Medigap or Medicare Supplement insurance coverage is offered by private insurance companies . All Medigap Plans are standardized , so the benefits with Plan F from ABC insurance company are the same exact benefits with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . Often times , Seniors are only aware of a few insurance companies that offer Medigap Plans . This is because of their heavy marketing techniques . In reality , there are many more insurance companies available and probably most of them you 've never heard of -- but since Medigap Plan benefits are standardized by CMS , it does n't matter what the name of the insurance company is . An independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance can share which insurance companies are in your area and which ones have the best price . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can help you find Medigap coverage in your area .
There are many companies that offer Medigap plans , but not every company offers every plan and in every state . Most insurance companies have a handful of states they do business in for their Medigap plans and only sell several of the available plans -LRB- e.g. company XYZ only sells Medigap plans A , F , G , and N -RRB- . Since Medigap plans are standardized -LRB- meaning the coverage is the same , regardless of the company it 's through - the only difference being the price of the coverage -RRB- , it 's important to find out all of the carriers that offer plans in your zip code . Some of the big name companies in the Medigap marketplace include , but are not limited to , United Healthcare -LRB- parternered with AARP to use their name on their Medigap plans -RRB- , Omaha , WellPoint -LRB- Anthem and other Blue Cross carriers -RRB- , Aetna , Cigna , Humana , Central States Indemnity , Medico , New Era , Royal Neighbors of America , United American , and Equitable , to name a few - there are a number of other companies out there in the Medigap marketplace . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It can be overwhelming research Medigap on your own . The best way to choose a Medigap Plan is to work with an independent agent . Trying to navigate the internet is time consuming and actually limits your Medigap choices . However you wish to proceed , make sure you look at a comparison chart and Outline of Coverage for the 10 standardized Medigap Plans . They each have varying benefits . You 'll want to determine which benefits are important to you and which Medigap plan best fits your budget . The two most popular plans are Medigap Plan F and Plan G. Medigap Plan F will cover all the gaps in Medicare coverage . You do n't have to meet any deductibles , co-pays or co-insurance . Medigap Plan G acts just like Plan F -- after you 've met the small $ 147 annual Part B deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F . If you would like assistance in comparing plans and premiums , please contact me . My personalized service is always free .
In addition to what Jason stated , I 'd also like to point out that not all insurance companies offer Medigap Select plans . In fact , the insurance companies that offer Medigap Select Plans often are the major companies advertising online . Their premiums are usually high and to make the Medigap Plan more ` affordable ' , they offer the Medigap Select . One of the great benefits of having a Medigap Plan is your freedom to choose any Medicare provider without the boundaries of a network . Getting a Medigap Select Plan will limit your freedom . While you may be happy with your local in-network hospital , if you want to see a cardiologist in a neighboring state , you 'll be out of luck on a Select Plan . There are dozens of insurance companies that offer Medigap Plans at affordable prices . I 've never had to offer my clients a Medigap Select Plan F , G or N because I 've always found them an affordable Medigap Policy by taking the time to shop the Medicare Supplement market .
The best way to buy a Medigap Policy is through a licensed independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . We work closely with you to make sure you understand the benefits associated with Medigap Plans and how they work for you . Independent agents are not employed by insurance companies . Instead , we have contracts with multiple carriers that allow us to shop the Medigap market and find you the best price for the Medigap Plan you desire . Some people like to avoid insurance agents and do the work themselves , but with Medigap insurance that is not going to save you time or money . Most insurance companies will not provide their insurance premium information to the public . The carriers who do share their premiums with you will , often times , be much more expensive . I have done a fair share of helping people move from their expensive Medigap premium to a lower one while still keeping their same exact benefits . Most of the time they had no idea there were other insurance companies available to them . If I can help you with your Medigap insurance needs , please feel free to call me at 1-888-411-1329 or visit www.remedigap.com .
You can buy a Medigap Plan at any time during the year as long as you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have Original Medicare Part A and Part B , you may want to consider buying a Medigap policy sooner rather than later . Original Medicare only covers generally 80 % of your medical costs , leaving you to pay the other 20 % -- as well as the Part A deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 in 2014 -RRB- and the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The best time to buy a Medigap Policy is during your initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only , 6 month window when Federal law allows you to buy ANY Medigap Plan sold in your state -RRB- . During this period you can not be denied coverage . If you already have a Medigap Plan , you can buy a policy whenever you wish . You will just have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . Your application will have to approved through the medical underwriting department . It 's important to note that the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap Plans . If you have some health conditions , a Medicare Supplement Specialist can work with you to see which insurance companies might be good match for you . In some cases , you may have a Guaranteed Issue Right to purchase a Medigap Policy if you have other health care that changes in some way -- for example , you lose other health care coverage . This means you 'll get a small window of opportunity to purchase a Medigap Plan without being denied coverage . It ' s best to contact an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to help you determine if you are in this type of situation . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can assist you with your Medigap insurance needs .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medigap plan at any point during the year - Medigap plans are not subjected to the same restrictions as Parts C & D of Medicare . You can complete an application up to 3 months in advance of the proposed effective date for the coverage - please note , you have to have both Medicare Part A & Part B to buy a Medigap plan . For example , if your effective date is April 1st , you could apply as early as January 1st . And vice versa - you can set the effective date up to 3 months later from the application date -LRB- most will set it up for the 1st of the following month though -RRB- . The effective date for your Medicare Part B coverage is also the starting point for your initial open enrollment period - a 6-month window where you can buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting -LRB- this is the best time to buy a Medigap plan -RRB- . Beyond this window , you will be required to answer health questions on the applications and go through medical underwriting -LRB- there are no exams though -RRB- , unless you have a qualifying event for a guaranteed-issue right . You should work through a broker who can shop the case for you and find you the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost . It 's important to review your Medigap plan every year to see if a lower rate is available after the initial rate lock guarantee expires and/or when you have a rate increase . The benefits of a Medigap plan do not change from company to company - they are exactly the same . A plan F from one company features the exact same benefits as a plan F from another company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best Medigap insurance can be found with the company that offers the lowest premium for the Plan you want . It 's really that simple . All Medigap Plans are standardized . This means each lettered plan has the same exact benefits from one insurance company to the next ... the only difference is the price . CMS has safety nets in place for Seniors , so if you have a Medigap Plan your bills are going to be paid according to the benefits of your Plan . If you have Medigap Plan F , all your Medicare approved charges will be covered and you do not have to pay any deductibles or coinsurance . Medigap Plan G works just like Plan F and covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible . With so many insurance companies available who sell Medigap insurance , it is wise to work with an independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . That way you can choose the best Medigap Plan that is right for you .
You can change your Medigap Plan at any point throughout the year . You do not have to wait for AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period from Oct. 15 - Dec 7 -RRB- . The Annual Election Period only applies to Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug Plans . You 'll have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan if you are not in your Open Enrollment Period or other Guaranteed Issue situation . To medically qualify , you have to answer health questions on the insurance application and then get approved through the medical underwriting department . It is best to contact Medicare or an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to see if you are still in Open Enrollment or a Guaranteed Issue situation . If you have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan , an independent agent can review your health history and help determine which insurance companies are best suited for your situation . There are several reasons why you may want to change your Medigap plan -LRB- lower premium , more benefits , less benefits -RRB- . The main reason people want to change is usually because of price . Over time , premiums increase and what you may be paying for Plan F may be very different from your neighbor . Although Medigap plan benefits are standardized , the price is not . An independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance can provide quotes for your Medigap Plan so you can compare it to what you 're currently paying . Please feel free to read this article which gives a little more detail about changing your Medigap insurance . WEBSITELINK Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can help you with your specific situation .
Most people enjoy Medigap Plan F because of it 's comprehensive health coverage and consider it to be the best Medigap policy . Medigap Plan F will pay all your Medicare approved charges that Original Medicare Part A and Part B does n't cover . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance with Plan F . There is a lot of talk about Medigap Plan G becoming the `` best '' Medigap Plan . It works just like Plan F by covering all your Medicare approved charges not paid by Original Medicare -- after you 've satisfied the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium with Plan G is usually much less than Plan F. Even when you add in the Part B deductible there is still savings for the same Medigap benefits . If I can assist you with your specific Medigap needs , please feel free to contact me .
Medigap or Medicare Supplemental insurance is private health insurance put in place to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . It will help cover some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does not pay . For example , Original Medicare will pay around 80 % of your health care costs . This leaves you with the responsibility of paying the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved amounts . Medigap insurance will help pay copays , co-insurance , and deductibles -- the ` gap ' in Medicare coverage . Medigap Plans are standardized . There are 10 lettered Plans all offering different Medigap benefits . However , each lettered Plan has standardized benefits . This means Plan N with ABC insurance company is the same Plan N with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . The most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. Plan F covers all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any copays , co-insurance , or deductibles . Plan G covers all Medicare approved amounts -LRB- just like Plan F -RRB- after you 've met the small annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you are shopping for Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance , it is often challenging to find premium information on your own as many insurance companies do not publicly publish their premiums . With that said , you will find some very large insurance carriers who will give quotes online . This , though , can come with a higher premium to you . Another option is to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We freely shop the Medigap market and find you the best premium for the Plan benefits you desire . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your Medigap insurance needs .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How To File A Claim With Home Insurance ?
You file a claim for homeowner 's insurance with your broker . Once the claim has occurred , you will need to provide specific information regarding what happened , the extent of damage , the cause of damage and if there is a risk of additional damage . Generally , a claims adjuster or other personaffiliatedwith the insurer will be in contact you .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
Filing a car insurance claim for minor issues could result in an increase in what you pay , so you do want to consider a few things before you file a claim . 1 -RRB- Is this claim something I can pay for on my own ? If the answer to this is yes , you may be better off paying it and not filing a claim . 2 -RRB- How much is my deductible ? If your deductible is $ 500 , and the damage to your car is $ 700 to repair , you are still going to pay the majority of the cost yourself . You should try to pay the entire amount , and not get your insurance involved . 3 -RRB- Was someone else responsible for the damage ? If someone else caused the damage , it is very possible that THEIR insurance will need to pay for the damage . In this case , you have two options : contact their insurance and file your claim against their insurance , or file a claim with your insurance , and explain that the other driver was at fault . Your insurance will then pay your claim , but will seek repayment from the other driver .
Claims will affect your home insurance but other variables are considered . Other variable include , how long you have been with the insurance company , how many claims you have filed , type of claims , payment for each claim , credit , other policies with the same insurance company . Filling a claim does not automatically increase your rate but filing several claims will .
Great question . This happens more often then you 'd think . First thing you want to do is get busy finding a new policy to protect your investment especially if you have a mortgage . Mortgage companies will charge you for what 's called `` A Forced Placed Policy '' . This is a policy that covers their interest , you have no coverage for your self , your personal property or to rebuild your home in the event of a total loss . Without scaring you understand this type of policy will cost thousands of dollars and does nothing for you except raise your monthly mortgage payments . You also want to know why they cancelled your policy . Was it a roof replacement ? Tornado ? Fire ? Small claims can add up as well prompting a cancellation . We want to think about the claims we file before we file them . If it 's something you can handle without filing a claim do so , remember your future rates are at stake . 1 . Get on the phone and call your insurance company . Ask them why they cancelled you . You 'll need to know this before you call around for rates . 2 . Call insurance agencies that work with multiple insurance companies . -LRB- One company may take you with no claims and another may have guidelines of a limit of a number of claims where some may not take fire or water damage claims -RRB- 3 . If all else fails and you ca n't find coverage due to claims then call Farmers Insurance , they have a company `` Foremost '' -LRB- also some independent agencies have them as well -RRB- they take risks with a high number of claims . Shop around , it should n't take you more then a few hours to find a company that will take your home .
The copyright or trademark infringement are usually excluded from General Liability coverage . The claim , however , me be filed under personal / advertising injury . I suggest you contact a legal adviser to properly file a claim . The worst case scenario , the claim will be denied . Based on the information provided in your question , whether the carrier covers the claim or denies coverage , it is unlikely your policy premium will increase with the renewal . However , depending on your carrier 's loss experience with insureds with similar to your business operations and/or number of claims filed under similar conditions , the insurance company has several remedies : - to increase rates for your class of business . That means the carrier wo n't debit your individual policy , instead they will increase rates for every business that provides same products or services . - to send you a non-renewal notice . The carrier simply stops entertaining coverage for you , based on the loss experience . - to exclude related exposures from future coverage . That means any future claim involving similar exposures likely wo n't be covered . I suppose no insurance agent is able to give you a certain answer . Because the carrier 's decision on claim and future plays with many facets , including policy wording interpretation , and also based on the actuarial data of the given insurance company . A simple web search can reveal countless stories of claims denied and then accepted , bad face lawsuits , etc. .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
From the agents perspective this is what happens : 1 . Client gets into an accident and needs to make a claim : 1a . The client contacts the agent and the agent files the claim by filling out the appropriate ACORD form . 1b . The client contacts the insurance company directly and files the claim that way . 2 . The insurance company will do one of a couple of things : 2a . The insurance company will process the claim quickly and pay out the amount as is stated in the insurance agreement -LRB- e.g. actual cash value or agreed upon amount -RRB- . 2b . The insurance company will send an adjuster to investigate the claim and pay out according to the adjuster 's findings . 2.c The insurance company is going to deny the claim because it was not due to a covered peril . If 2b . or 2c . occurs then you should contact your agent and let him/her deal with the insurance company to try and get you more money for your claim . Most states have a time limit for how long it can take the insurance company to respond . I know in Michigan the insurance company must respond within 30 days of a valid claim . If nothing has been sent back -LRB- either a payment or dispute -RRB- then you should contact your agent or the governmental agency that oversees insurance . I hope this helps .
I am not aware of any way for an individual to file a claim with Medicare . Medicare requires medical providers to file claims directly on your behalf and do so on a timely basis . Claims are filed electronically , adjudicated by Medicare , and then Medicare files your approved claim with your Medigap carrier via crossover .
There are 2 ways to file a claim you can contact the carrier claim number that is listed on your policy or you can contact your agent that wrote your policy . I Always instruct our clients to contact us 1st that way we can document your file and make sure that your claim has been process right away and filed correctly . having to file a claim is stressful enough a good agent should be able to guide you through the process
Claim history is a big factor for insurance companies but just because you have a claim does n't mean your rate is going to increase . Several factors are used to determine a rate including the length of time you have been with an insurance company , credit , type of claim filed , amount of claim , castropheclaimsect . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover `` sudden and accidental '' losses . It is not a maintenance policy and you do not want to file small claims . Filing frequent , small claims will cause your rateto increase or your policy may be cancelled .
If it is the Insured person and Policy Owner who has the claims against them , and they die and leave the life insurance proceeds to a beneficiary , the beneficiary does not have to pay the claims of the Insured unless they co-signed for that debt . If there is no beneficiary and the life insurance money ends up in the estate , creditor claims can be filed during probate . If it is the beneficiary who has the claims against them , it depends on the state of residence as to whether a claim can be filed against the beneficiary 's life insurance proceeds , and/or how much of the death benefit is subject to creditor claims .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
In most cases , you do not need to file a claim to Medicare , as doctors/hospitals are required to file these claims for you in a timely manner for Medicare-covered services and supplies . If , however , your doctor has not filed a claim , you can contact them and ask them to do so or call Medicare at 1-800-MEDICARE . If it is close to the time limit -LRB- 12 months -RRB- and your doctor has not filed the claim , you can do so using Medicare 's Patient Request for Medicare Payment Form -LRB- CMS-1490S -RRB- . WEBSITELINK
Contacting your agent may not necessarily result in increased premium but reporting a claim might . Your agent is very unlikely to know how much your rates may increase if you were to file a claim . Keep this simple rule in mind : The less claims you file through insurance company the better . You are better off paying a small claim out of pocket . Let the insurance company handle your large claims . Even not at faults and comp claims will have some impact on your rates with most companies .
Immediately ! Call your agent or insurer and get started on that process . Claims can take a while to resolve or they can be resolved quickly . If you have a police report or evidence ready to go as soon as you file your claim , it can often get fixed faster . That said , you can usually submit your evidence after the initial filing . I 'm not aware of any company that wo n't let you submit evidence after filing your claim but there are a lot of companies out there . Long-short of it , file as soon as possible .
If you are sued , call your insurance company immediately . If there is damage to your property that requires immediate attention , file a claim with the company . This is particularly important with water damage or any damage the affects the integrity of the home . If the situation isnt urgent discuss the loss with your agent before filing a claim . If the claim is minor it might be better to forgo the claim and enjoy a further premium discount for being claims free .
That is a good question . In most states coverage for auto related claims will fall under your auto insurance . Having said that , some homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for theft away from premises . The more important question is , `` What is your homeowners insurance deductible ? '' If you have a $ 500 deductible and the key FOB is $ 500 , and it was covered , you would collect $ 0 because you have n't exceeded your deductible . Even if your policy did provide coverage , and you exceeded your deductible , I would n't recommend you file a claim . Homeowners insurance is best reserved for catastrophic losses like ; wind , fire , hail , lightning , hurricanes , water damage from a pipe burst , etc. . If you file a claim for your key FOB and next week have to file another claim because of something listed above , the insurance company will have grounds to non-renew or cancel your policy . Even if they did n't cancel your policy , you could see a rate increase because of the claim that was submitted for your key FOB . Over the next few years you would likely exceed the value of the key FOB with increased insurance premium cost . The thought process by the insurance companies is `` frequency leads to severity '' and insurance companies do not like severity . Hope this answer helps .
There are several factors that would determine how long it would take to get a home insurance . The first consideration would be the type of construction -LRB- brick , log , vinyl siding , etc -RRB- & how far is the closest fire hydrant and how far away is the fire department . The condition of the home would also be considered ... is it in need of repair or well maintained ? Is your credit good and have you filed claims in the past on other properties . Typically , most insurance companies have access to a large data base that keep info . There are some other factors as wellthat would be considered . Finally , some agents will have binding authority if the home is not high in value . In which case , you could get coverage on the home the same day it was quoted .
A fence is normally covered under a homeowners policy . Please contact your agent before filing a claim as a fence claim may not exceed your deductible and if it does there might be premium adjustments that would make filing the claim questionable . There are claims that you should not file .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Write An Appeal Letter To Health Insurance ?
If you write an appeal letter to your health insurance company , call the carrier or broker first to obtain a contact name and address . Be sure to include all pertinent facts about your claim denial and additional information that may cause an underwriter to consider changing their decision . It never cost anything to request a reversal .
how to write an appeal letter for Disability Insurance ? If you 've been declined for issue of a Disability policy you can appeal to the underwriter to reconsider the decline if you have additional information to offer or there is some change to what is in question . Underwriters , especially disability coverage underwriters work under strict guidelines . In order to appeal you must be able to introduce new information . Usually with a decline , the letter will provide the reason for .
If you write an appeal letter to your health insurance company , call the carrier or broker first to obtain a contact name and address . Be sure to include all pertinent facts about your claim denial and additional information that may cause an underwriter to consider changing their decision . It never cost anything to request a reversal .
The most common approachto file an appeal to a Medicare claimis to complete a `` redetermination request form , '' and send it to theMedicare contractor at the address listed on your Medicare Summary Notice . You should circle the items your would like appealed , explain in writing -LRB- with as much detail as possible -RRB- why you disagree with the original determination , and include as much information as possible to back up your case . An appeal will always have a much higher likelihood of succeeding if your doctor or other health care provider also supplies a written statement backing your position .
If you have had a claim denied and you disagree with the determination in the letter that was sent to you the letter will also have an explanation of how you should respond . Generally the letter would state you have 30 days to put in writing why you feel your claim should not be denied . State all the facts clearly then mail the letter in to the address on the letter sent to you and your rebuttal will be reviewed . If you are still denied but feel you are right and the insurance provider is incorrect in their assessment you can write to your states department of insurance and they can look into the matter . I also highly recommend you discuss the matter with your agent .
Why were you turned down for life insurance ? There could be numberous reasons or just one . If you were declined you should have been notified of the decline and advised to your rights to appeal the decision . Life insurance underwriting looks at your medical history , your current health , your driving record , your credit history and other things health and financial . You should have received a letter .
To appeal a Long Term Care Insurance denial or Life Insurance denial , you must first find out the reason for the denial . It may simply be that the company was unable to secure a certain set of medical records , and thus could not make a decision based on lack of information . You might be able to track down those medical records and be able to be approved . Or , your medical records or MIB may state your health in a mistaken way . You may be able to do additional testing to disprove that , or get an informative letter from your doctor stating the correct information . This can be submitted directly to the underwriter and/or to the MIB to get your information there corrected .
To be honest , I am not sure if you are asking about being denied a policy , or having a claim denied . If you are denied a policy by one company , just have your Insurance Professional find another company whose underwriting standards would enable them to offer coverage . If you are denied coverage on a claim , again , check with your Insurance Professional about that company 's coverage terms and conditions and what their appeal process might be . If still unsatisfied , you could always send a letter to your state 's InsuranceDepartment and ask them to inquire .
Universal health insurance can also be referred to as single payor health insurance and is a term used to denote a health insurance system that covers all citizens of a nation . Generally the concept of a Universal Health Insurance system is used in reference to the government run or managed systems such as are found in Canada and many European countries . While there are variations on the theme from country to country the objective , as the name implies , it to provide health insurance coverage to every citizen of the country regardless of their income or health status . Usually Universal Health Insurance systems are funded by taxes paid by the nation 's citizens and businesses . The concept of Universal Health Insurance sounds appealing to many and is becoming part of the ongoing debate in the United States about how to finance our citizen 's health care needs . In theory everyone would have comprehensive health insurance coverage with the cost spread out amongst every citizen and with lower overhead costs as a single , government run agency administers the health insurance system . In practical terms , the real world results of such systems have fallen short of perfection and have their own sets of problems and sources of dissatisfaction just as we experience with our current mixture of private and public based health insurance systems here in the United States .
Our colleagues at HDA give you a great answer about 21st Century . However a couple weeks ago I wrote coverage for a customer -LRB- from 21st Century -RRB- with one of our agency 's top performing companies . . We were able to write the coverage for both auto and home with an ability to create over $ 700 in discounts on the homeowners for having the companion auto policy insured by the same carrier . Even on a jumbo home for our area $ 700 dollars is a lot of premium . Consider if you will that being a homeowner makes you a better credit risk and insurance risk , but offering only the auto or only the home is not as appealing to many carriers as the whole account . Some carriers in fact offer common deductibles for the same event -LRB- such that a hail storm would require one deductible not one on each car and one on house -RRB- So , seriously consider the coverage upsides and downsides along with price in your comparison shopping .
Disputing a health insurance claim , or what usually is the rejection of a health insurance claim is an appeals process . All carriers give the insured the opportunity to appeal a decision . This process is usually lengthy and in my experience often unsuccessful . Do n't let that stop you from getting what you deserve however . As an experienced agent , if my client feels the carrier should have paid , then I encourage and assist in the process .
Writing a cover letter to insurance carriers informing them of the death of an insured should discuss the cause of death and the circumstances that surround it . Short and to the point communication is best . In the vast majority of cases , a family member , who may also be a beneficiary , compose cover letters to the insurance company . If the death occurred during the first two years , the insurance company will investigate the death with greater due diligence to confirm if suicide was that cause of death . If suicide was the cause of death the claim would be denied .
The simplest way to cancel any insurance is to simply stop paying the premiums . The policy will lapse and be cancelled . If you 've paid premiums in advance you may be able to get a partial refund if you write a letter formally cancelling the policy and requesting a refund of the unused portion of premiums paid . You will want to keep a copy of the dated letter and have the one you mail certified with a delivery receipt .
Any time you request a cancellation for insurance it 's best to put it in writing . You can write a letter and fax or e-mail it directly to Progressive . I would also recommend following up a day later to make sure they received the document . If you 've moved make sure you include your new address if you are owed a refund .
How to write a letter for a life insurance claim ? There really is n't a need to . Contact the carrier or go online and you will find or request a death claim form . In it , there should be instructions on how to fill out and what additonal paperwork may be necessary . Usually a certified copy of the death certificate is needed for submittal . Your agent should be able to help you complete the steps you need to .
Can you cancel your term life insurance ? Yes , you can cancel a term policy a couple of ways . First , simply let the insurance company know in writing that you wish to cancel . They will cancel on the date asked for or the date of receipt of the letter if no cancelation date is given . They will refund any premium unused . The second way is to let the premium lapse . Why would you do it this way ? Because it gives you a grace period to really be sure it 's what you want to do . I remember my first day in this business , there was a couple of people in the office crying in loud voices , `` but he did n't mean it '' . They were there trying to reinstate a policy that the owner had just cancelled and died like a week later . There was the letter from the insured , demanding his policy be cancelled on a certain date and it was . Unfortunately , he died a few days after .
That is a great question ! If your claim is denied , the first thing to do is find out why . If all that is needed is a police report , or something easily fixed , then you can get that accomplished , and resubmit the claim . You can always appeal the decision also , but if you need the car fixed top drive it , be aware that sometimes appealing can be a lengthy process . Get with your agent , and have them help you get the issue resolved . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Always . You do n't have to wait for your renewal date , either . Whatever happened that makes you want to switch does n't matter . It 's your home and your choice as to whom you choose to insure it . Just be sure to go about it in the correct manner . The first step is to find a new agent , one you can trust . It does n't really matter if it 's an independent agent or an agent that only writes through one company . Most good companies wo n't be that far apart so choose your agent first . Find one that cares and can explain everything to you and take their advice . Then you can cancel your current policy . The correct way to do this is to write them a letter requesting the policy to be cancelled and choose the effective date of the new policy . They 'll cancel your policy and send you back any unused premium . This will usually take a week or so before you receive your refund check .
ABN stays for Advanced Benificiary Notice of Noncoverage . A doctor or Medcare provide may give you an ABN if they believe Medicare may not pay for the service you require . The ABN lists the services and items that Medicare isn ; ' t expected to pay for , an estimate of their cost and what Medicare may not pay for them . There are 3 options for you to choose from on the ABN form . 1 . You want the item or service , the provider may ask you to pay for them but you want a claim submitted to Medicare . The claim may be denied , you may be responsible to pay the provider but you can file an appeal to Medicare . Option 2 : You want the items or service but you do not want the provider to make a claim to Medicare . You may be asked to pay for the items or serivce now . Since the provider did not file a cliam to Medicare you can not file an appeal . Option 3 : You do not want the item or servce trhat may not be paid for by Medicare .
SAGA Home Insurance is a foreign company doing business in the U. S. that supposedly caters to the over 50 market . The first question I would have is the cultural differences that could be built into the policy that you would not know about until you had a claim . The marketing `` over 50 '' concept is an obvious push to appeal to the more established individual that has assets and therefore insuring a more expensive home . Companies like CHUBB , Hartford , and certainly State Farm has not failed to recognize that market . A foreign company would really have to compete for my business and they would have to convince me that there policies incorporate the values we expect in the U. S. . Am I saying that the policies are bad-no , not at all . I am saying you are going to do your due diligence if you decide to spend your money with a foreign company . What guarantees do you have that a policy dispute you may have can be successfully negotiated when you are dealing with a foreign company . Contrast that against your ability to appeal the decision of a U S Company direct to your DOI vs. having to hire an attorney .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Negotiate Life Insurance Rates ?
Good question in as much as you can negotiate price for just about anything else ! But , no , life insurance premiums are really not negotiable . It 's interesting to note that different insurance companies do have slightly different pricing for similar products , but once approved by the commissioner they are locked in until the insurance company can prove their costs have risen . Tim and Peggy above here have good input regarding getting the best rates . I would add that if you can pay your premium annually instead of monthly or quarterly you will save a little . Generally the less payment processing the company has to do will reflect in the premium charged .
No , the applicant has no say in what a life insurance contract will state or cost . The best way to get the absolute best price is to live a healthy lifestyle and use an experienced independent life insurance broker than can shop at least dozens of companies to find you the best product at the best price for your unique situation .
State insurance commissioners regulate insurance companies that are admitted to their state . Along with the commissioner in the state where an insurance company is domiciled they review and approve the rates each company charges for each insurance plan that they offer . In a way the insurance commissioner negotiates on your behalf to make sure that the plan is sound and that the company can keep its promises .
No , life insurance rates are non-negotiable to the extent that you can not ask for a discount . Likewise , all agents must charge the same rates . When you see an agency advertising affordable rates , what we mean is that we can shop multiple companies to place you with the one that is most favorable for your health and age . When you see an agency broadcasting extremely low prices for life insurance , what they are doing is quoting the best rate for the shortest term . Most brokers have access to those same companies and rates , and applying with one agency over another will not cause you to qualify for a discount . What does matter in life insurance rates is matching up with an agency who understands your situation and can help your policy be placed at the best possible rate . This starts with putting your application with the right company , and it ends with seeing that policy through to the end . If your doctor has retired and moved to the Bahamas and no one can find the medical records required to get your policy approved , this agency will track them down or work with the underwriter to get you approved without them . If you are rated up due to an error on your MIB , they will help you get it corrected and go back for a lower rate . If your spouse loses their job and you can no longer afford the 30 year term policy you were approved for , they help you get the 10 year term until you are back on your feet . While insurance agents can not negotiate life insurance rates , we can be responsible and knowledgeable and help you get the lowest rates by simply doing our job correctly and thoroughly .
Can you negotiate Term Life Insurance ? That is a great question . Many people think that life insurance companies hold sales , and ads can easily give people that impression . But life insurance actually has set rates , and the only negotiable part may -LRB- or may not -RRB- be what you are rated . Most life insurance companies must justify to their reinsurer -LRB- s -RRB- the rating that they give an applicant , which means sticking to underwriting guidelines . That is why you can often get a better rate by shopping with an agency that carries many different companies , because you can take advantage of a variety of underwriting guidelines and find the one that works best for you . Sometimes , when a rating is given , extra information can be provided to the underwriter to convince him/her to improve the rating . Sometimes knowing that another company rated you better can help bump your rating up . These are possibilities that could result in you paying a lower price . But how the life insurance itself is priced is not negotiable .
No , life insurance rates are non-negotiable to the extent that you can not ask for a discount . Likewise , all agents must charge the same rates . When you see an agency advertising affordable rates , what we mean is that we can shop multiple companies to place you with the one that is most favorable for your health and age . When you see an agency broadcasting extremely low prices for life insurance , what they are doing is quoting the best rate for the shortest term . Most brokers have access to those same companies and rates , and applying with one agency over another will not cause you to qualify for a discount . What does matter in life insurance rates is matching up with an agency who understands your situation and can help your policy be placed at the best possible rate . This starts with putting your application with the right company , and it ends with seeing that policy through to the end . If your doctor has retired and moved to the Bahamas and no one can find the medical records required to get your policy approved , this agency will track them down or work with the underwriter to get you approved without them . If you are rated up due to an error on your MIB , they will help you get it corrected and go back for a lower rate . If your spouse loses their job and you can no longer afford the 30 year term policy you were approved for , they help you get the 10 year term until you are back on your feet . While insurance agents can not negotiate life insurance rates , we can be responsible and knowledgeable and help you get the lowest rates by simply doing our job correctly and thoroughly .
If you are asking about negotiating rates for individual term life insurance then the answer would be `` No '' . Each life insurance carrier has their own actuarial models they use to develop the rate tables for their products which they in turn file with insurance departments . So , it 's pretty much a `` what you see is what you get '' quoting environment . Sometimes , if you are rated up during the underwriting process because of information gathered from the Medical Information Bureau -LRB- MIB -RRB- or from results of a medical exam taken to qualify for the coverage and you successfully challenge these decisions -LRB- not a real common occurrence -RRB- you might see an reduction of or dropping of the proposed risk adjustment . If you are wanting to get the best pricing possible for term life insurance then the best thing to do is shop around among different life insurance carriers . If you are talking about group term life insurance policies , then if you are bringing enough employee lives to the table and represent enough premium volume to make it worth an insurance carrier 's time , you may be able to negotiate a better price or get a bundling discount for purchasing other insurance products from that insurance carrier .
That is a great question ! If you find an insurance company that will allow you to negotiate with them , would you please drop me a quick note and let me know who they are ? Kidding aside , you will not find one . Insurance companies are the strictest of bean counters , and there is n't a one that will change rates for you . They are very strictly regulated , and in most cases , would have to change the whole rate group 's premiums to match whatever rate that you were able to negotiate . That is very , very unlikely to ever happen . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
I am not sure exactly what you mean . But if you mean going without , then no a mortgage company would not allow that , and if you own outright it would be a foolish choice to go without . If you mean price negotiation , then that really is not practical as the rates used are filed with the individual state Insurance Departments usually months before they are used or even years if a company is comfortable with the rates it has filed . All that said you might want to seek out an Independent agent who has multiple companies . You wo n't be able to negotiate price , but you will have a chance to compare what you get in the way of coverage from several companies.For GA Homeowners , Auto , Renters or Life Insurance contact the Insurance Browser Inc 1-866-933-4372
Good question in as much as you can negotiate price for just about anything else ! But , no , life insurance premiums are really not negotiable . It 's interesting to note that different insurance companies do have slightly different pricing for similar products , but once approved by the commissioner they are locked in until the insurance company can prove their costs have risen . Tim and Peggy above here have good input regarding getting the best rates . I would add that if you can pay your premium annually instead of monthly or quarterly you will save a little . Generally the less payment processing the company has to do will reflect in the premium charged .
Your insurance company will give you what you agree to take . Generally speaking they will use a pricing service such as Kelleys Blue Book or Edmunds to establish a price for a car with your mileage and general characteristics . You can negotiate with the insurance company if you feel that the price is not accurate . In those negotiations you can not rely upon modifications that you have made to the vehicle .
Physician services can be quite affordable even without health insurance . It is possible for patients to negotiate a cash price at a steep discount from the gross billed price . If the chest X-ray is done in your doctor 's office , it is possible to negotiate a price in the $ 50 area .
If your car is declared a total loss you will be offered a settlement for the value of the car minus the deductible -LRB- if you were at fault . -RRB- Frequently you will be given the option to retain ownership in the car for a negotiated amount . If you then have the car restored , the licensed car will have a salvage or C title . The settlement is negotiated between you and the insurance company . Make sure that you understand all the options and assert your position if it is necessary .
In general , you can not negotiate life insurance . The rates are set at a certain cost per thousand dollars of coverage , and there is no bargaining allowed to reduce that cost . However , if you are rated higher than you think is fair , you can use an experienced life insurance agent to go to bat for you . You may be able to get a letter from your doctor that helps the underwriter see your health in a better light . You may be able to provide additional medical records or testing to improve your rating . You might possibly even be able to obtain a lower rating from one company on the grounds of what another company rated you .
-- > Normal 0 With no disrespect , my response to this question might be slightly different . Every insurer may have a rating structure they use to calculate a premium but rates will vary from insurer to insurer and one insurer may have several rating tiers they can use for pricing flexibility . So my response to this question would be , yes , you may be able to negotiate more favorable rating treatment if you request it . So dont be afraid to pursue the availability of additional discounts , preferred rating treatment for good credit , recent structural upgrades , no prior claims , multiple policies with the same insurer , etc. .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
Your car insurance rates will typically rise after a DUI How much ? It depends on the company you 're insured with and other violations you may have on your driving record . A large increase and/or suspension are possible . What to do ? Utilize experienced brokers to find the lowest rates . That 's our job and along with our top-rated websites , we shop the major companies to bring you the lowest prices . Also , the relationship between broker and underwriter can sometimes help the customer . Having an extra helping hand in your corner may be critical to negotiating the best rates . As the DUI gets older , your rate should gradually reduce . Of course , there are other policy changes that may help , including increasing deductibles . Working with an experienced broker online gives you the best of both worlds . A DUI is a serious matter and you need knowledge and unbiased advice working with you .
No . Insurance rates are set by actuaries . They are mathematical professionals who calculate the probability of an event occurring , and price their rates accordingly . They do give credits for a reduction of risk -LRB- alarms , sprinklers , nearby fire hydrant ... -RRB- , but the number is not negotiable . Every company calculates their risks differently , and some may need to add a certain risk in their portfolio in order to diversify , or may prefer a certain type of risk , and therefore will be priced better for a certain policy , which is why your agent should shop your policy to multiple carriers to ensure you get the best rate .
There are three basic planning goals for life insurance : Indemnification , Income and Inheritance . Indemnification At minimum , seniors have final expense liabilities that they generally dont desire to pass on to their children . Covering those expenses with a final expense life insurance product is a great alternative with a company that offers benevolent geriatric underwriting . Life insurance underwriting is extremely important as you become older , especially if you need more coverage than final expense . A good life insurance company that has sizable retention and death benefit break points can really help keep the price tag down . Retention is the risk the life insurance company is willing to take on without sharing the risk with other life insurance companies . The bigger the retention , the more wiggle room to negotiate the underwriting offer . And death benefit break points can reduce the cost of insurance as you buy more coverage . Break points generally start at $ 250,000 , then $ 500,000 , $ 1,000,000 and $ 3,000,000 . Guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice . Income Life insurance has the potential to generate tax advantaged income and , if properly designed , may generate tax free income as long as the policy is issued as a non-modified endowment contract and is kept in force for the life of the insured . Some seniors use life insurance tax free income in tandem with their Social Security benefits and defer their qualified plan distributions until age 70 . Its a good planning strategy . Life insurance policies with the least expense loads are the most desirable . Indexed universal life may be the best policy choice . Inheritance Many seniors desire to make a difference with their children , grandchildren and charities . A survivorship policy for married couples is the best solution because in leverages two lives on one contract and pays the death claim at the death of the second insured . Survivorship guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice for married couples and guaranteed universal life may be the best policy choice for single seniors . We spreadsheet the life insurance companies based on underwriting , product provisions and price , assisting seniors in the decision making process .
With more than 34 years of experience in the HSA/Health insurance business , I 'm happy to offer my expert and unbiased answer . Although the average deductible has substantially increased over the last 30 years , the popularity of the HSA concept is here ... and here to stay . High Deductible Health Insurance plans -LRB- HSA -RRB- are very popular for individuals and families that want quality medical coverage from reputable companies , but at a rate they can afford . Even with the passage of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- aka Obamacare -RRB- , the popularity of HSA accounts has increased . But what about the future of these types of plans ? Their popularity is not likely to decrease , since health insurance costs keep increasing , and there is no other type of coverage that can offer a combination of network-negotiated discounts and paying for healthcare , dental , and vision expenses with tax-free dollars . However , as our political landscape changes , be prepared for unanticipated changes ! As we move closer to 2017 and 2018 , many legislative changes are planned . These changes could impact the cost of coverage and the amount of federal subsidy that is received . Both the group sector and individual sector could be adversely affected . So ... Expect HSAs to continue to be a popular and `` normal '' choice to consider for individuals , families , and small and large businesses . Answer provided by Edward Harris , one of the nation 's premier healthcare authorities . Edward is the owner of majormedicalhealth.com , where consumers can compare the best health insurance rates from top-rated companies .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Soon Should I Apply For Medicare ?
You can apply for Medicare up to 3 months before , the month of , and up to 3 months after your birth month . You should apply during the 3 months before the month you turn 65 so your coverage starts on time -LRB- the first day of your birth month -RRB- - you can be subject to a delayed effective date if you apply during the 3 months after your birth month . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- can help cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . When you first enroll in Part B , you have a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . The advantage of having a Medigap plan to go with your Original Medicare coverage is that it creates a very predictable expense structure -LRB- a major advantage for seniors living on a fixed income -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The time it takes to get life insurance is from a few hours , to a few months . If you apply for a No Exam policy with a company that does not order medical records , the processing time is usually a few days to a few weeks . Some are put into effect shortly after applying via phone interview . If you apply for a policy that requires paramed exam and medical records , the amount of time that it takes to go into effect will depend on how soon you take the exam , and how soon your medical records come in . The underwriter usually waits until everything is in before reviewing your case . If at review time , he or she finds that you had seen another doctor , they might order additional records , which causes further delay . It is helpful to list all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years on your application , or else even collect medical records yourself , in order to get your policy in effect ASAP .
To answer the question of how to apply for life insurance , I would need to know the type of policy for which you are applying . 1 -RRB- Medically Underwritten This is the type of policy that requires some type of exam , and possibly the life insurance company will order your medical records . Applying for this type of policy requires that a fairly lengthy application be completed . It may be filled out on paper , digitally or over the phone . You might do it with your agent , with your paramed examiner , on your own , or with a representative of the insurance company . Once everything is collected by the underwriter , the company decides what to rate you , and you generally accept the policy by paying the first premium . Because there are so many different types of medically underwritten policies , there are a number of variations on how to apply for them . 2 -RRB- Simplified Issue Simplified Issue policies do not require an exam . Some never require medical records , while others order medical records as needed . Filling out the applications for simplified issue life insurance has about as many choices as medically underwritten applications . However , these policies tend to go into effect much more quickly , and it is often their practice to draft the first premium as soon as you apply or are approved . 3 -RRB- Guaranteed Issue Guaranteed Issue Life Insurance does not ask any health questions and has no medical requirements at all . It does not usually entail a phone interview , although applications are usually done face to face with an agent . Generally , these policies are graded and should go into effect within days .
A person drawing Medicare should own a Medi-gap policy . That need starts the day that they start on Medicare so they should apply before that date . If for some reason the coverage lapses they should make every effort to get a replacement policy as soon as possible . The Medicare program is not designed to take care of all of a persons medical needs .
How soon depends on the kind of health policy you apply for . There is short term which will take at least 5-15 days for approval . Then there isthe major medical plan that has to be reviewed including your medical records to qualify you for which coverages then some may even have waiting periods until you may use the policy . Then there is indemnity which is cash payment to the policyholderwhich starts as soon as the policy is approved within a day or two . It is mainly accident and sickness and critical illness with no waiting period .
The original purpose of Life Insurance - the reason it was created is to transfer the risk of a person dying too soon from that person and their loved ones to the insurance company . Generally if a person dies while still having debt or not having enough money to care for their heirs , that person has `` died too soon '' . In a lot of people 's opinions dying at any time is too soon ! But that 's a philosophical consideration . Over time Permanent Life Insurance has come to play an important part in the financial well-being of insureds while living . Term insurance on the other hand remains solely for the purpose of insuring against a person dying too soon . Peggy listed a number of uses for Permanent Life Insurance , and I would add that the cash value of whole life insurance is a terrific asset for use in personal banking applications . For more information see WEBSITELINK
That is an excellent question ! I am pleased to hear of your interest , as a Roth IRA is a terrific way to save for retirement . I can not advise you strongly enough to start saving for retirement as soon as possible . Yesterday is not soon enough . Conventional wisdom says to retire at your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times your current salary . Please start one soon , and if possible , contribute as much of the annual $ 5500 that you can -LRB- $ 6500 if you 're 50 + -RRB- . I hope that helps - thanks for asking !
The best answer that I can provide : `` As soon as practicable . '' This is the best answer I can provide because each insurance contract details under the common policy conditions when a claim must be reported . Typically , most contracts require that you report it as soon as you possibly can -LRB- i.e. as soon as practicable -RRB- . Moreover , in addition to when you must report the claim you have too look at what other conditions must be met , like preservation of property , filing a police report and cooperating with the insurance company . I hope this helps .
How long a claim takes really depends in most cases how soon or fast the insurance company can get all the information . The sooner all reports , statements and documents are turned in the faster a claim can be handled . Claims adjusters have no desire to keep a claim on their desk and wish to get people whole again as soon as possible .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
If a life insurance policy is medically underwritten , it will go into effect after the policy is approved and issued and delivery requirements are received . If it is a No Exam policy , the policy can go into effect as soon as the policy is approved , which could be as short as hours after applying . You must be sure to have enough money in your checking account to be drafted as soon as a No Exam policy is approved .
How much disability insurance do you need ? Well , the answer will vary depending on the individual and what they have asset and investment wise and how willing they are to liquidate those assets . As far as how much or how long or how soon is a function of looking at your situation and finding something that works for you .
Term life insurance is really only for specific needs because term life is only insurance against a person dying `` too soon '' . -LRB- Of course dying at any time is `` too soon '' in most people 's opinion ! -RRB- The point being that there are debts or spouse and or children that would need to be financially cared for in the case of the demise of the insured . And that after a certain point in time those issues would no longer be relevant . In my opinion Whole Life is a much superior product and has benefits and advantages for the entire life of the insured no matter how well off the family is and if there are no debts ! You should consult with an experienced Insurance Adviser / broker to help you with your specific situation .
When your agent was talking to you in the beginning about all of your insurance needs did they ask you about the alarm system ? Some but not all insurance companies will require an active alarm system to offer theft coverage on owned property . Most insurance companies will offer premium discounts on property coverage with an active , central station monitored alarm system but will not exclude theft coverage without the alarm . I would recommend that you contact your agent and ask them for a copy of your original application if you do n't already have a copy . That will indicate how the alarm system question was initially answered . Also , ask your agent if your insurance company requires an alarm system to be covered for theft on your property coverage . I would do this as soon as possible . If your company does require the active alarm to have theft coverage , then you will want to get that alarm system up as soon as possible to avoid having a break in or burglary denied by your insurance company . The thing to remember is that every insurance company is different in their policy forms . I would find out about this right away from your insurance company/agent .
You have been operating your business for 6 years without incident which is great . This is the first claim -LRB- and hopefully last claim , -RRB- so I understand your concern about your premiums increasing next year . I 'm not exactly sure what your business does , but knowing what you do would help me to further figure out whether or not your premiums would increase because of this claim . When re-marketing your account with other insurance companies we would need to explain what happened and discuss the likelihood of this happening again . Insurerslook at the historical data associated with past claims , current trends , andalso consider estimations of future losses to help determinethe rates that they use.This is a great question and thereare several things you need to consider.When you get a moment , turn to the conditions section of your CGL policy . The conditions state what your duties are in the event of occurrence , claim , or suit . 1 . Notify company of occurrence a . You must see to it that we are notified as soon as practicable of an `` occurrence '' or an offense which may result in a claim . To the extent possible , notice should include : -LRB- 1 -RRB- How , when and where the `` occurrence '' or offense took place ; -LRB- 2 -RRB- the names and addresses of any injured persons and witnesses : and -LRB- 3 -RRB- The nature and location of any injury or damage arising out of the `` occurrence '' or offense . b . If a claim is made or `` suit '' is brought against any insured , you must : -LRB- 1 -RRB- Immediately record the specifics of the claim or `` suit '' and the date received : and -LRB- 2 -RRB- Notify us as soon as practicable If you read the `` Obligations at Insureds Own Cost `` condition it says : `` No insured will , except at the insured 's own cost , voluntarily make a payment , assume any obligation , or incur any expense , other than for first aid , without our consent . '' There are many questions that would need to be answered , but if I were you I would put my insurance carrier on notice that there has been an incident and let them take the reigns . Please contact me if you have any additional questions or concerns about this claim . I would be happy to help guide you in the right direction . Have a great weekend . Best , Josh DeBoer
That is a great question ! One I 'm sorry that you have to ask ... I 'm sorry for your loss . Each Stat 's Department of Insurance will have in its codes the specified time limits for filing claims , beginning the processing , and for making the payments . You may want to look there for your answer . The fact that your loved one passed so soon after purchasing the policy is always a red flag for the insurer , their first assumption is that there was a desperate health issue that led to the purchasing of the policy , and perhaps some dishonesty in the application answers . That is certainly not always the case , but that is how they treat it . They will ask for Doctor 's statements , coroner 's or autopsy reports , police reports , whatever documentation they need to determine if the timing was coincidental , or expected . Once they 've received all of the documentation , the process moves pretty quickly . I 'd expect the process to take between 6 weeks and 90 days , maybe longer , maybe sooner , depending upon how quickly everything is received . In any case , you will receive a payment for some amount . It will either be for face value of the policy , if they find in your favor , or for what had been paid in premiums over the length of time the policy had been issued , and some amount of interest , if they do n't . Should the latter be the case , you do have the right to appeal , but you 'll need a good lawyer and some money to outlast the insurer 's lawyer and overturn the decision . If you feel that you 've been wronged by them , you have the right also to file a complaint with the State . If you do so , be nice to your agent , because unless they advised you to misrepresent the truth , or have you apply fr something that was n't appropriate , I can guarantee you they had no part in the decision that was made by the company , In fact , they will have been asked for a statement also , and would have had to tell their impression of your loved one 's health . I 'm sorry for your loss , and I hope everything works out for you . Thank you for asking !
I assume that the question is : `` Can I take the premiums I pay for long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- and deduct all or part from my income tax return ? '' The answer to that question is `` Possibly '' . The IRS permits a non-business owner to applya portion of the premium paid for LTCi to the medical expenses section of Section A. There 's a cap on how much one can apply to `` medical expenses '' in this part of Schedule A . It goes up every year . Here 's the current table for 2013 : If you are 40 , or younger , you can apply $ 360 of your premium to `` medical expenses '' . More than 40 , but no more than 50 , $ 680 More than 50 , butno more than 60 , $ 1360 More than 60 , but no more than 70 , $ 3640 More than 70 , $ 4550 The maximum one used to be able to totally deduct for `` medical expenses '' on Schedule A had to exceed 7.5 % of adjusted gross income -LRB- AGI -RRB- . I believe that is now 10 % of AGI , or soon will be . One can check for this information at WEBSITELINK . If addingthe maximum allowable LTCi premium amount from the table above to the `` medical expenses '' of Schedule A does not push your total expensesover 10 % AGI , no deduction is allowable . But , if it does , you can only deduct that amount that exceeds 10 % of AGI . If you are a business owner , there are severaloptions for deducting LTCi premiumsother than using the Schedule A formulas and threshold . Most tax preparation software and certainly professional tax advisors will show how one might deduct LTCi premium payments , depending on how the business is set up -LRB- sole proprietorship , S-corp , C-corp -RRB- for tax purposes . Under current tax code , C-corps have the most generous allowances for deducting the payment of LTCi premiums by the company . Legislation for 100 % deduction of LTCi premium payment was in committee in Congress at the time of the terrorist attacks of 9/11/2001 . That event put virtually all increasedallowances and tax incentives for private purchase of LTCi on hold . No legislation is currently pending to change the in force formula shown above . It will increase in 2014 and forward for as long as Congress allows . At this writing , a special commission on the federal government 's involvement in supporting the height costs of long-term care for the elderly is being debated and testimony is being received from elder-care professionals . So far , little has been discussed about the role of privately owned LTCi as part of a solution for the coming crisis of those in the baby-boomer generation `` taking too long to die '' . No part of this answer is intended to be tax advice . Consult with a qualified tax professional before making any decisions regarding the purchase of financial instruments or insurance policies and the tax treatment thereof .
Medicare should be notified of your death as soon as possible . Medicare will request a certified death certificate as part of the process . Assuming you have a Medicare supplement plan , your carrier should also be notified of your death . If Medicare and your Medigap carrier are not notified in time to stop your next payment , you can ask for a refund .
Are n't you defeating the purpose of life insurance if you borrow on the `` cash value '' . You do have to repay the loan . Are you familiar with : first in-last out , or Last in first out '' > How does the insurance company treat the disbursement for tax purposes ? I realize we are living in hard times and some of us are forced to do things we would not ordinarily do because of the economic conditions . Pulling money out of a life insurance policy is much more than `` I am borrowing money from my life insurance policy '' ? How will you repay it ? How soon will you repay it ? There two seemingly easy ways to borrow money-borrow from yuor 401k and borrow from your life insurance . Bot ways can get you in trouble and cause tax problems you certainly do not need
Life insurance goes into effect after the first premium has been paid and the delivery requirements have been signed . If you purchased a No Exam policy , the company may draft the first premium and the policy might go into effect very quickly , as soon as a day or two after applying . If you applied for a policy that required exam and medical records , it could take as long as 6 months for the process to be completed and the policy to go into effect .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does My Renters Insurance Cover My Roommate ?
No . If you read your policy , you will see in the Definitions Section , the definition of Insured . It would look similar to this `` Insured '' means you and residents of your household who are : a. Your relatives ; or b . Other persons under the age of 21 and in the care of any person named above . If your roommate is not a relative , he is not insured and would receive no benefit from the policy in the event of fire or liability claim . If you were apply for the insurance in your name and your roommates name , and the company issued a policy , then your roommate and you would be covered . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
There are very few companies that write non-related individuals on the same renter 's policy . This status of delineating coverage is called `` Named Insured . '' The drawback to these policies is that a claim check would be made payable to ALL named insureds ; so if only your stuff was stolen from your vehicle or otherwise damaged , your roommate would also need to sign off on the check before you can cash it . The other drawback is that , in the event of a claim , it goes on the personal history of all named insureds . So if your roommate has a claim , it can penalize YOU for the next 3 to 7 years -LRB- depending on company -RRB- even if you guys separate households . Even if a roommate has no personal property -LRB- i.e. contents -RRB- , a critical component of renter 's insurance is liability . Ideally , each roommate should have renter 's insurance , so that if a guest is hurt on premises , the lawsuit could be filed against the responsible person . Most renter 's policies also include Personal Injury coverage under the liability , but some do not . Personal Injury covers damages to a third party that you may be legally liable for , but where the injured party suffered no physical injuries . The most prevalent claim currently is slander/libel from social media . Refer supra to what I indicated about claim history . Do you really want to be responsible for your roommate 's posts online ? I know I do not . I currently rent myself as it is a better deal where I live than ownership . I do have a roommate , and we each have our own separate policies .
In order for roommates to be covered by renters insuranceroommatesmust be listed on the policy . Many companies will not cover more then 1 roommate so often times each person residing in the property would need to purchase their own renters policy as well . AnInsurancecompany will assume a risk based on the application and does not look to cover what they have not been made aware of . Especially in a liability situation .
Great Question : Renters insurance covers the named insured and his wife and kids . But for example if you live with a roommate you need to have separate policy for each of you guys . The insurance company wants each roommate to have his own personal renters policy to cover his personal property .
Who owns what in the apartment or home you are renting ? YES , each roommate needs to have Renters Insurance . Your insurance will only cover your material possessions . If you own all of it , then you there really is no reason for the roommate to have the insurance . Be sure to get the replacement value v. current value renters insurance . It will cost a little more however which would you rather have , the value your TV is currently worth or what it costs to get a new one ?
There isnt a legal definition for roommate . The person who needs to have a renters policy is the person whose name is on the lease and who has personal property on the premises . The personal property of a roommate is not covered by the policy although it is difficult to establish who owns what . The only person who must have the liability protection is the person on the lease .
No . If you read your policy , you will see in the Definitions Section , the definition of Insured . It would look similar to this `` Insured '' means you and residents of your household who are : a. Your relatives ; or b . Other persons under the age of 21 and in the care of any person named above . If your roommate is not a relative , he is not insured and would receive no benefit from the policy in the event of fire or liability claim . If you were apply for the insurance in your name and your roommates name , and the company issued a policy , then your roommate and you would be covered . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
Renters Insurance will not cover your roommates unless they are also listed on the policy . Renters Insurance would cover your guests but not roommates . Renters Insurance typically covers your personal belonging and protect you against any claims in which you may be liable for . For more information please visit rocoinsurance.com
Great question ! Typically a policy , whether it is a renters , health or life insurance policy will only cover the person or persons named on the policy . So if you put you and your spouse , you both are covered . If you name your family , then you all are covered . If it is just you , and you have a roommate who is not named , you are covered , they are most likely not . Check your policy and see who is listed , and who they will cover , or call your agent and have them tell you . Thanks for asking !
For the most part , yes , unless you 're married or live with your parent -LRB- s -RRB- . For the property part of your insurance , you must have an insurable interest in the property . The insurance company will only pay the owner of the property in the event of a claim . If you do n't own it , you have no loss . If you 're married , the property is considered to be owned by both so either can collect from a loss . For the liability portion , you must be a named insured or the dependent of a named insured . If you have a roommate and you both get sued , your liability covers you and their liability covers them . Look at it this way , if you 're roommate gets sued for doing something negligent , do you really want that to be your problem ? A good agent will help you choose the right coverages for your situation and build a policy you can afford . Be smart and find an agent you can trust . It 'll save you money in the long run .
Some insurance providers may allow you to add a room mate to the renters policy but they must be listed in order to be covered . What is most often the case is each roommate will be required to carry their own insurance to protect their own liability and property .
Most renters policies identify a primary insured . A secondary insured -LRB- roommate -RRB- can also be named . The payment for the policy can be handled any way that the customers desire . There are certain legal privileges extended to the primary insured .
Renters insurance premiums take into account the value of the property being insured . So your roommates valuables may send your premium up . While a specific dollar amount isnt assigned to each of your valuables , the insurance company will use everything you inventory as insurable to determine the overall price of your policy . So more stuff makes for a higher premium . While you might still think splitting a higher premium is cheaper than paying your own , consider the drama of deciding your portion of the deductible and dividing up the payout . Its most prudent to purchase separate policies in order to keep your finances separate .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Some companies will cover unrelated individuals living together under the same contract as long as they are each listed in the policy declarations . Some will not . Ask you agent or broker about your specific situation . It is a safe bet that if you take on an unrelated roommate , he or she will NOT be covered unless specifically added to the tenants package policy .
That is a great question ! Yes , is the short answer . Your roommates insurance company will not pay you for your stuff , or house you , if something were to damage the apartment enough to force you out of it . They will only pay for whomever has the policy , and whatever they have covered under their policy . The rest of you would be out of luck . Nor would they cover your part of the expenses if it was from your apartment that the fire , smoke , water , etc. damage originated . Only the person with the liability coverage will be helped . Protect yourself , and get a policy . They are relatively inexpensive , and can be a Godsend should there be a problem in your home , or with your stuff . Thank you for asking !
Roommates should have separate tenant insurance policies . There is no `` insurable interest '' in the property of the other on which to base a legal basis to pay a claim . Moreover , liability of the one without insurance will be uninsured and there are no legal means available to a policyholder to assume liability or transfer rights under a policy .
Yes . If you have multiple roommates , you can all be listed on the same policy . This will save you on the premium . Just beware that if one of you has a claim , it will count against all of you . That may raise your rates for the next few years even if you are not living with the person who filed the claim .
For the most part , yes , roommates should buy their own policies . It is always a good idea to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific laws in your state and terms and conditions of your contract . However , having your pwn policies means that in the event of a loss , there would be less liklihood of having to try to determine which of you owned what .
No , renters insurance is written to cover the personal property of the insured and their immediate family residing with them . Your roommate would be responsible for purchasing their own renters insurance policy to protect their personal items . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover A Broken Refrigerator ?
Your tenants policy does not cover a broken appliance . It does cover an appliance that is damaged as the result of a covered loss . For example if there was a fire in the kitchen and the refrigerator need to be restored or replaced your tenants policy would have coverage . There are policies that can be purchased that cover appliances but it is not your tenants policy .
Your tenants policy does not cover a broken appliance . It does cover an appliance that is damaged as the result of a covered loss . For example if there was a fire in the kitchen and the refrigerator need to be restored or replaced your tenants policy would have coverage . There are policies that can be purchased that cover appliances but it is not your tenants policy .
-- > Normal 0 In the spirit of every reasonable insurance question is deserving of an answer , I submit . Tenant Homeowner or Renters policies cover damage to your personal property and food certainly would be considered Personal Property . As long as the power outage was caused by one of the named perils in your policy -LRB- fire , lightning , wind , vehicle damage , etc. -RRB- and it occurred on your premises , you may have a valid claim for food spoiled as a result of a power outage . But if the power outage was caused by something that occurred away from your residence , most Renters policies specifically exclude that type of loss unless the power outage then causes covered damage to your residence . Remember however , most Renters policies have a deductible of $ 250 or more so make sure you take that into consideration . Add to that the effect submitting a small claim , one less than $ 1000 , could have on your future premium or the willingness of your insurance company to renew your coverage . It may be a good idea to pass on submitting this type of claim even though you may have some coverage . In addition , most policies require you to take reasonable steps to preserve your property following a loss . Make sure you have done what you can to prevent your food from spoiling following a power outage . Some policies include a number of additional coverages , often an effort to make one companys policy appear more attractive than another . These additional coverages provide nominal amounts of insurance covering specific loss situations such as key replacement or food spoilage . Here again , you may be tempted to submit a claim because you have coverage but consider the impact a claim might have on future premiums and renewal terms . You may be better served to simply replace the food . When an event like this occurs , try to recall why you purchased insurance in the first place . More than likely , it wasnt to reimburse you if the food in your refrigerator went bad .
Renter 's insurance policies typically do not cover power outages since most of the resulting damage -LRB- if any -RRB- would apply to the structure . However , it is possible that you may have some coverage to spoiled food from a refrigerator losing power . However , appliances that no longer work is generally not covered . You should always , however , ask your broker .
One of the main coverages in a renters policy is personal property . If you own the refrigerator and it is damaged due to a covered peril the policy will pay the value minus your policy deductible . There were several terms that need your attention ; covered peril excludes normal wear and tear . Another term is value as the way that is determined is governed by the policy and should be checked .
Ask yourself a question about what would be better : eat a watermelon or eat an apple ? The answer depends on many different smaller questions : are you hungry , are you thirsty , are you constipated , do you have a refrigerator to keep watermelon leftovers ? Same with homeowners ' insurance carriers , each has something to offer , each has its ups and downs . For example , The Hartford recently changed the policy paper in California , which resulted in some coverage restrictions . In the same time , Travelers has better Green Home endorsement that is suitable in case of a total loss . Safeco has a great program for renter 's insurance . Contact us at 800-339-0104 or visit our website and compare instant homeowners insurance quotes from multiple carriers : WEBSITELINK
Yes it does . If you suffer such a loss as a result of a direct or indirect lightening strike , for example , then any damage to your electrical system , well pump , appliances and even in some cases , lost food out of your freezer and refrigerator should be covered . This last one , of course , would be a result of a long term power outage .
Homeowner 's insurance policies typically cover additional living expenses -LRB- Loss Of Use -RRB- from a covered claim . These expenses must be reasonable and may include expenses you incur while having to live or stay away from your primary residence while it is being repaired or rebuilt . Sometimes a hotel is economical and/or needed so the expenses would be covered . The expensive little bottles ofalcohol in the mini-refrigerator ? Sorry ... those you have to pay yourself !
If the food spoilage is a result of a covered peril then yes the food would be covered in most cases . For example , a major windstorm causes a power outage for an extended period of time . As long as reasonable efforts were made to conserve the food it would most likely be covered subject to your deductible . Since most people carry a $ 500 or $ 1000 deductible it may not be to your advantage to turn in a claim if that is all that is lost . Most people do not have that much spoilable food in their refrigerator and freezer .
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
Yes , unless specified otherwise by your contract , Lightening damage is typically included as a covered peril an Homeowners policies . Naturally , any related damage is subject to your deductible so you need to read your policy and check with your insurance professional about your particular situation . Damage to your home , electrical system , appliances and electronics are all covered under this provision . If you suffer a long term power outage as a result , be sure to ask your insurance professional about coverage for contaminated food in your freexer and or refrigerator , too .
If you loose food out of our refrigerator or freezer as a result of a long term pwe outage that is caused by a covered peril in your Homeowners ' Policy , then more than likely you do have some coverage . Of course it is generally subject to your deductible .
In many cases , food spoilage that is a result of a long term power outage is covered by your Homeowners ' insurance . It is possible that the coverage may be limited to about $ 500.00 . The loss is subject to your deductible . When there is a storm approaching , in order to help to get your possible claim handled as quickly as possible , conducting an inventory of your refrigerator and freezer , as well as paking pictures can certainly be a benefit .
Normally , you dont want a homeowners policy for a rental piece of property . Your only insurable interest is in the structure itself . You want one of the dwelling fire policies . You might add some limited personal property to the policy to cover your property at the location , for example , a range , or refrigerator . You must make sure that you also provide liability coverage to protect you against lawsuit arising from owning the structure .
It may , yes , but talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . Many Homeowners ' policies offer some limited coverage for lost food items in a freezer or refrigerator that is caused by a long term power outage . The outage , of course , must be caused by a covered peril like a storm for example . The loss would also be subject to your property deductible in many cases .
It may , but of course , check with your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . Assuming there is coverage , it must be caused by a covered peril . In CT , the most common cause is extended power outage caused by a storm or ice build up that causes tree limbs to snap and take down power lines . In those cases , most policies do provide some limited coverage for food lost from freezers and refrigerators , usually up to $ 500.00 . This is , of course , subject to your deductible .
It may , yes , but it is important to check with your Insurance Professional and discuss the terms and conditions of your particular policy . In general , if food items are lost from a refrigerator or freezer as a result of a long term power outage AND the cause of that power outage is a covered peril in your policy , then there will be some coverage . I have seen that in most cases , the amount of coverage is limited , usually to about $ 500.00 and of course this is subject to your deductible .
Damage to your home and personal property that is caused by a sudden and unexpected surge of electrical power that is the result of a lightening strike more than likely would be covered by your Homeowners policy . It is always best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms , conditions and potential limitations of your particular policy in order to best understand it 's provisions . In addition to damage to your home and/or appliances , be sure to ask about loss of food from your freezer and refrigerator if the power loss is extended . Many Homeowners ' policies include some limited coverage for this , usually about $ 500.00 . Naturally any loss settlement would be subject to your policy deductible .
Renters Insurance is designed to reimburse you the current value or replacement value of items which are damaged due to an unforeseen event such as fire , water damage , etc. . If your electronics just stop working , is broken , it probably will not be covered . If it was broken by a stranger , I would look at your policy to see if that would be covered . As always , reach out to your agent or get a consultation with a reputable agency who can design the best possible coverage . You may have to look at a different type of insurance for `` broken '' items versus damaged from an event .
Home insurance does not cover a broken TV , a broken radio or any broken appliance . Wear and tear and product defect are simply not perils that insurers pay for for home policies . Fire , theft , vandalism and many other items would be covered . An experienced broker can review the best prices in your area so you pay less and cover more .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Who Should Enroll In Medicare Part B ?
The only persons who may not want to enroll in Medicare Part B are those who have a group plan that has features better than Medicare Part B , and for which the group policy would be the primary payer . There is no penalty to wait until your group plan ends , to sign up for Part B Medicare . If you are an active duty service member and age 65 , you could also wait to sign up for Part B. For everyone else who qualifies , enrolling in Part B is reasonably priced and something you have paid into . Unless you have moral reasons against it , prefer private coverage , or are able to insure yourself , I know of no reasons to not enroll in it .
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part B has several enrollment periods that you should be aware of . The enrollment period that you may qualify for may vary based on what your current situation is . The first Medicare Part B enrollment period that most people experience is the `` Initial Enrollment Period '' . This is a 7 month window that starts 6 months before the first day of the month in which you turn 65 and lasts 6 months after the month in which you turn 65 . If you enroll in Part B using this enrollment period your medicare Part B will start on the first day of the month you turn 65 or if you enroll after your 65 birthday your coverage will begin on the first day of the following month . The Part B `` General Enrollment Period '' is for individuals over 65 that do not currently have medicare part B or other creditable health coverage . This period is from Jan 1st through march 31st every year . If you enroll in part B using this General Enrollment Period your Part B coverage will start on July 1st of the same year . There is also a `` Special Enrollment Period '' that begins 63 days before and ends 63 days after the date you lost creditable health coverage from an active employer . You may also qualify for an 8 month Enrollment period that begins on the day you lose employment and/or employment based group health coverage .
You will enrolled for Medicare Part A automatically when you turn 65 . If you are receiving Social Securiy you will be enrolled in Part B automatically and Social Security will start deducting your Part B premium from your monthly Social Security Benefit . If you are not receiving Social Security benefits Medicare will notify you 4 to 6 months prior to your Medicare open enrollment period that you are eligible for Medicare the first day of your birth month on your 65th birthday . Your Open Enrollment Period is a 7-month period beginning 3-months before your 65th birthday and 3-months after . You can reply to the Medicare enrollment reminder to enroll you in Medicare or you can decline Part B . If you are not receiving Social Security benefits you will have to pay the first 3-months of your Part B premium by check or money order . You can decline Part B without penalty as long as you are enrolled in an qualified employer health care plan . If you are not enrolled in such a plan you will be penalized 10 % each year when or if you apply for Part B . You can also use the Medicare.gov website to enroll online .
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . Please note , when you enroll in Part B during the general enrollment period , your effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . When enrolling under a special enrollment period , the effective date would be the 1st of the following month after you apply . The effective date of coverage when applying during the general enrollment period will be July 1 of the year you apply . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- generally covers approximately 80 % of your health care expenses . A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan can cover gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- up to or all of the remaining 20 % , depending on the plan -RRB- . This is the optimal structure for many individuals . Plan A and Plan C are usually available Medigap plans for people under 65 on Medicare , but the premiums can be much more expensive than when you 're 65 or older . An alternative option would be a Medicare Advantage plan . I would recommend consulting with an insurance agent/broker to compare Medigap and MA plans that are available -LRB- and see if you have a special enrollment period available for Medicare Advantage plans - if you do n't have a special enrollment period , you would have to wait until the Annual Enrollment Period -LRB- October 15-December 7 of each year -RRB- to enroll in one -RRB- . For individuals on Medicare who are 65 or older , they would likely only have a group plan through an employer -LRB- if they 're still working -RRB- to provide secondary coverage -LRB- although the group plan may pay first and Medicare pay second -RRB- . Under this scenario , you would likely only have secured Part A and not Part B of Medicare as Part B requires monthly premiums - Part A is generally premium-free for most individuals . The premiums for a traditional under 65 health plan for someone 65 or older would be substantially more expensive than setting yourself up under Part A , Part B , and securing a Medigap plan or enrolling in a Medicare Advantage plan .
A medigap policy is also known as a Medicare Supplement policy . These policies are issued by a number of insurance companies in response to the out of pocket expenses that are not covered by Medicare , part A and Part B . A medigap policy is almost necessary for all Medicare participants . There can be massive out-of-pocket expenses in Medicare and the money that could be provided by the plan far outweigh the cost of the plan . These plans were developed by private companies . In response to the wide variety of policies developed the federal government decided to regulate these policies in the 1980s . The desire was to provide uniformity of benefits . There are ten different medigap policies available . They are referenced by letters A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M and N. Although these plans can change from time to time they have maintained these designations . Companies are not required to identify their policy by these letters and will often introduce stylized names such as Senior Select Medigap policy . It is most important to understand that all of the plans must contain core benefits . As they add additional benefits they must fall into one of the letter categories . This helps to compare plans and to insure that your needs are properly covered . You can enroll in a medigap policy during certain periods . During those periods the policy is guaranteed to be issued without medical underwriting . If the policy is desired after the set period medical underwriting can be required and the premium can be altered . The open enrollment period begins on the first day of the month in which you reach age 65 or older and enroll in Medicare Part B . This enrollment period continues for six months . People who are disenrolling from Medicare Advantage can receive a guaranteed issued medigap policy for 12 months when they enroll in traditional Medicare . There are other circumstances under which a person would be eligible for a Medigap policy without providing evidence of insurance . There are five core benefits contained in every medigap plan . The first is that the plan will pay the Medicare Part A copayments for days 61-90 . These copayments were $ 289 per day of hospitalization in 2012 . Another core benefit is Medicare Part A lifetime reserve copayments for days 91-150 . These copayments are $ 578 per day in 2012 . Another core benefit is up to 365 additional days of hospital stay beyond Medicare coverage . The medigap policies also provide cover the Medicare Part B coinsurance . This doesnt apply to preventive services , and the first three pints of blood if needed . These core benefits comprise an A plan . Subsequent plans offer increased benefits which include skilled nursing facility care copayments for days 21-100 . That cost was $ 144.50 in 2012 . The plan can provide for the Medicare Part A hospital deductible . That amount was $ 1184 in 2013 . The plan can provide the annual Medicare Part B deductible which was $ 147 in 2013 . Some plans include coverage for the Medicare Part B excess charges . Several plans include foreign travel emergency coverage . Every plan is priced by the insurance company . Sometimes the company offers the plan based upon the community . In other cases the pricing is determined by the age at which the plan is initiated . In other cases the plan is based on attained age and can increase as the policyholder ages . The core benefits can save you a great deal of money . Selecting the additional benefits is probably best done with a counsellor that you trust .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
As explained above , when you turn 65 you are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A . As long as you are a citizen , or a legal resident and have worked 40 quarters in the United States , this benefit will be free . If you have worked less than the 40 quarters , you may be able to buy the Part A benefit . In addition , if you are under 65 and disabled you may also be eligible for Medicare coverage . Part B of Medicare is optional unlike Part A . If you are enrolled in Part A and have insurance through your employer , you may not have to enroll in Part B , which costs $ 104.90 per month . However , if you want to benefit from full Medicare coverage , you will need Part B as well as Part A . In addition , if you would like to enroll in supplementary insurance in addition to Medicare -LRB- Medigap , Medicare Advantage orPart DRx coverage -RRB- , you must be enrolled in both Part A and Part B.
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
For all intents and purposes , the answer is no . There are certain drugs , which must be prescribed , e.g. Cancer treatment drugs , that are covered under Medicare Part B. Drugs covered under Medicare Part B would also be covered under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs however are not covered by traditional Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- or Medigap supplemental insurance . An eligible Medicare beneficiary needs a Part D prescription drug plan in order to obtain drug coverage . You can enroll in a Part D plan at Medicare.gov , subject to certain enrollment period restrictions . As an alternative to a stand alone Part D plan , a beneficiary can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes Part D coverage -LRB- MAPD -RRB- . A beneficiary who enrolls in an MAPD can not have a Medigap policy or a stand alone Part D plan . It 's a good idea to find a licensed insurance agent who specializes in Medicare plans to review your needs and objectives and present you with optimal solutions .
The only persons who may not want to enroll in Medicare Part B are those who have a group plan that has features better than Medicare Part B , and for which the group policy would be the primary payer . There is no penalty to wait until your group plan ends , to sign up for Part B Medicare . If you are an active duty service member and age 65 , you could also wait to sign up for Part B. For everyone else who qualifies , enrolling in Part B is reasonably priced and something you have paid into . Unless you have moral reasons against it , prefer private coverage , or are able to insure yourself , I know of no reasons to not enroll in it .
Most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan . If you have any questions about your coverage or would like to review options for a Medicare supplement plan , please send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button or call me at 703-665-9133 .
Most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . Some people may be on Medicare before age 65 -LRB- certain requirements must be met such as being on social security disability/have end-stage renal disease and have been receiving benefits for 24 continuous months -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan .
No . While most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 , some people can enroll before then . They must meet certain eligibility requirements such as being on social security disability/have end-stage renal disease and have been receiving benefits for 24 continuous months -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan .
Individuals who reside in the United States and Puerto Rico who are eligible for premium free Medicare Part A are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part B . You can notify Medicare to not enroll if you choose . Medicare Part B is voluntary and has a premium . There is also and penalty associated with not enrolling when you are eligible without creditible coverage . A person who is not eligble for premium free Part A but is a citizen of the United States or a legal Permanent Resident that has lived in the United States for the previous 5 continuousyears is also eligible for Medicare Part B .
In short , You can enroll for Medicare Part A and Part B through the social security administration -LRB- most people enroll online at their website , ssa.gov , but you can also enroll at your local ssa office -RRB- . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance and part B is your physician insurance . Part A is premium-free for most people . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 for 2014 - may be higher for persons with higher incomes -RRB- . The deductible for Part A in 2014 is $ 1,216 - Part B 's deductible is $ 147 . You 're also generally responsible for about 20 % of the healthcare expenses that are incurred - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . You may want to consider buying a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- to cover the other 20 % . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable ! The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Long Can Children stay On Parents Auto Insurance ?
The answer to this question depends upon state law . In California all the drivers in the household , regardless of their age are included in the policy . The policy covers the car . The car is attached to a household . Unless excluded anyone in the household can operate any vehicle covered . In fact , anyone can operate any vehicle -LRB- provided that they have permission and are licensed drivers . -RRB-
From a contractual point of view , there really is n't any age limit . So long as your children remain residents of your home , and have access to and regularly use your cars , they need to be listed as rated drivers on your policy . Once they buy a car of their own and register it in their name , they would need to secure insurance of their own as well , at which point they can be removed from your policy . Check with your Insurance Professional about available discounts they might be entitled to if they ionsure their car with the same company as you .
As long as the children are residents of the household the children can stay on the parents policy as long as you wish . Keep in mind the vehicles will in almost all cases need to be registered to the parents or both the parents and the children . If the vehicles are only in the kids names then the children will need to obtain their own policy . The question is how long do you wish to continue to provide insurance for the kids .
Children can stay on their parent 's auto policy , for the most part so long as they continue to reside with them in their parent 's home and are driving one of their cars on a regular basis . If the child decides to purchase and register a car of their own , then they will need to have their own policy , at which point they would be removed from their parent 's .
Great Question . Kids can stay on the parents auto insurance policy till they leave the house and move on to college or get married . The advantage for that is the parent has all the discount offered by the insurance company like , home and auto discount and mulitple cars discount which can help lower the kids car insurance .
Typically there is no maximum age for kids being on their parents policy in auto insurance . In fact as long as they are residents of the household and are licensed drivers , then it is appropriate for them to be on the auto policy . Talk to your agent about your situation .
That is a great question ! Unless your State , or your insurance company has a rule stating otherwise , you can pretty much keep them on your policy until you are ready to boot them off . Most times they will need to get their own once they begin driving their own car , or have moved out or gotten married , and drive the spouses car . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Because of recent law changes by President Obama , children may stay on their parent 's health insurance policy up to age 26 . This is true throughout all 50 states . Children dependents , up to age 26 , may stay on their parent 's policy even if they are married , attending school , not financially dependent upon their parents , not living with their parents or even if they are offered their own insurance through employment . Special needs children can be covered under their parent 's plan past age 26 .
As long as the children are residents of the household the children can stay on the parents policy as long as you wish . Keep in mind the vehicles will in almost all cases need to be registered to the parents or both the parents and the children . If the vehicles are only in the kids names then the children will need to obtain their own policy . The question is how long do you wish to continue to provide insurance for the kids .
Children can stay on their parent 's auto policy , for the most part so long as they continue to reside with them in their parent 's home and are driving one of their cars on a regular basis . If the child decides to purchase and register a car of their own , then they will need to have their own policy , at which point they would be removed from their parent 's .
There are different views as to what the best life insurance is for children . If you have more than one minor child , getting a child rider on the parent 's policy is a very low price way of covering your children . If they develop a health condition , they will be able to convert their policy to a permanent policy of approx 5 times the value of the rider when they become an adult . If they stay healthy , they can purchase a permanent policy on their own , at a competitive price , when they become adults . Some parents prefer to purchase permanent policies for their children while they are young , and then give them that policy , all paid up , when they become adults . Either way , getting life insurance on your children ensures that they will be able to have affordable coverage as adults , in addition to providing protection if there was a tragedy while they are young .
Long-term care is worth it when 1 . A person is capable of affording to pay the premium for at least a base policy . There is no sense buying a long-term care policy only to have to let it go later because one can not afford it anymore . 2 . Assets that are targeted for moving to the next generation need protection against the high cost ofprolonged end-of-life care . 3 . There is a family history of dementia or Alzheimer 's disease , or other debilitating ailment that might be genetically transmitted . 4 . One does not want to be a financial , emotional , or psychological burden to their spouse or adult children . 5 . Quality of care is an issue . 6 . Staying at home for as long as possible if one becomes chronically ill instead of having to go into a care facility is important . 7 . Adult children are willing to pay premiums for a long-term care policy for their parents . Probability statistics are not entirely reliable because we really do n't know what new medical procedures or accommodations may come along in the future that would change the current situation regarding long-term care . But , the best guess I 've seen justified is that about 1 in 6 will need about 2 years of care to perform daily activities before they die . The cost for that in todays dollars depends on where one lives and how long family members can last taking care of a seriously disabled elderly person before they need skilled help .
Life insurance underwriting gives a lot of latitude to the definition of dependent . Its actually pretty interesting . I think this is because the whole principle of insurable interest implies a certain dependency . It is this principle that is the bottom line as to whether or not the company accepts the beneficiary designation on a submitted application . So who really can be dependent on the insured financially , and thereby qualify as a beneficiary on his or her policy ? Certainly a spouse . Does the spouse have to be working ? No . Can the spouse be rich and independently wealthy ? Yes . They still can be considered financially interdependent . Kids ? For sure . Minors ? Of course . How about children that are of legal age ? Well , they certainly could still be financially dependent on their parents . To some extent . -LRB- Until their parents boot them out of the nest :-RRB- Parents ? Yes . That is very common these days . Elder parents become dependent on their grown children financially . Sad to see , but it happens all the time . Other family members ? Could be . How many times do you see a family taking in a niece , nephew , cousin , aunt , or uncle ? Then you have the whole realm of domestic partners . Same sex . Opposite sex . Older man , younger woman . Older woman , younger man . As long as they have some kind of financial independence shared accounts , etc. they could be named as beneficiaries . And we havent even talked about how businesses can be dependent on people , as well as charities . Interesting , dont you think ?
When adult children are looking for life insurance for their parents , I find that that most common scenario is this : 1 -RRB- The parents are OK with their children doing the research , but are not crazy about doing it themselves , or may be unable to tackle that task for health or cognitive reasons . 2 -RRB- Children are usually looking for a final expense policy that will take care of their parents ' funeral and burial costs , pay off misc bills that may be present at death , and pay costs of settling the estate . 3 -RRB- The parents may go along with a minimum amount of underwriting , but may balk if there is an exam required . If that is the type of scenario you are presented with , I recommend getting a simplified issue whole life insurance policy . If your parents have serious health issues , they may need to go with a guaranteed issue whole life policy that is graded during the first 2-3 years . You will need to sit down with your parents to get their list of medications and health conditions , then contact an agent who understands final expense insurance to see if they can qualify for a simplified issue whole life policy that pays 100 % from day one for death by any reason . Some tips : 1 -RRB- You will want to go with whole life because it is certain to be in effect when death occurs , as long as premiums are paid . 2 -RRB- Look for a policy that has premiums locked in . Surprisingly , some very popular policies offered to seniors have rates that go up as they age , often making them unaffordable just at the time when they are needed . 3 -RRB- If your parents do n't want to do a telephone interview , you can get them a guaranteed issue policy that does not require a phone interview . Best wishes and please do not hesitate to contact me or other life agents on this website for assistance .
Before I can answer your question of how much Life Insurance for your child I really need to know what the purpose is . I recently helped a client who wanted to put $ 100 into a life insurance policy per month so it grows cash value plus providing a death benefit . First you need to know some of the `` rules '' we have in the insurance world revolving around children . Insurance companies will need to know how much insurance the parents have first . You see , no one depends on the children so if parents have no insurance , they it will be difficult to convince insurance companies to give a policy on the child . The parents usually need to have about 4x the amount the kids have . Because the cost of insurance is so low on most children , it can be difficult to put a lot of money into a policy without creating a MEC , modified endowment contract . This means that when you take money out of the policy , you will have to deal with taxes . If you are just looking for a burial type policy which you would like to give to your child as a gift when they are older , perhaps when they have a family , you might just start off with a $ 50k or so type of policy . Underwriting is usually minimal in most cases . You can get insurance for your children starting at $ 4 for $ 50k of death benefit , basically the same cost you would pay if you added them to your insurance as a child rider . Contact your broker for more details or contact me .
I love CPA 's . They give great accounting advice and some of them even know other things . But the `` minimum limits '' advice defies his training in some important ways . What your son lacks in `` assets '' he more than makes up for in terms of `` potential '' . What I mean here is that he may not have it now , but due to his young age , he 'll have a long time to earn and pay . Even though he is only 18 does not mean that he can not be responsible for an injury or death , or damage to property , and be subjected to an order of the court to garnishee his wage to make reimbursement to those who were injured , killed , or had property damaged . Now , should have have his own insurance ? Assuming he owns the car , he probably needs his own insurance . Staying in the household under household coverage is also OK but some insurers concern themselves with the owner of the car being different than the insured on the policy so proceed with caution when the vehicle is not actually owned by the policyholder . As a practical matter , the discounts that you might enjoy are lost to the child in many cases when they have their own policy . Some companies will extend multi-policy discounts to children of the policy owner . Some discounts do n't come through this connection , however . I like kids learning the responsibility of maintaining their own insurance . It gets the loss off the parents record , for one . Parents can help subsidize the cost if they want and help provide this as a reward for good outcomes on something else . All things said and done , I like responsible children on their own policies but deal with young drivers both on and off the parents policies so it comes down to personal preference and whether you are dealing with issues that poison the whole policy because of the young driver , or not , in many cases .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
The death of a spouse is perhaps the most emotionally traumatic event which humans experience . What would you do if your spouse died unexpectedly ? In over 55 % of married-couple families today , both marriage partners work outside the home at least part time . -LRB- 1 -RRB- Often the financial requirements to run the household substantially exceed the income of either spouse alone . If an untimely death were to occur , the inability to meet financial obligations with the single remaining spouses income might require the hasty sale of assets or , even worse , a bank foreclosure on the family residence . Life insurance is an excellent means of providing money when it is needed in these traumatic moments . Some families are fortunate enough to allow either the mother or father to stay home with small children while the other earns sufficient cash to meet household and living expenses . It is obvious that the loss of a breadwinner would create a financial calamity . Couples should consider the potential cost of replacing the services of the spouse who stays at home to care for the children . Without the deceased spouse , a surviving spouse working outside the home would face new expenditures for child care , either in the home or at a babysitter or day care center as well as someone to take the children to the doctor , dentist , piano lessons , etc. . Perhaps the surviving parent could take time off work to fulfill these obligations , but this time off work would also amount to a financial loss . Most families can help effectively remove this potential financial emergency by acquiring a life insurance policy on each spouse . Source : Statistical Abstract of the United States : 2012 , Table 700 Married-Couple Families ; data from 2009 . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
Under Obamacare adult children can stay on their parents ' health insurance until they are 26 . The law allows you to be on your parents 's plan if you are married . You may have to convince your parents tha , t although you are married , can vote , drive and serve in the military , you still need to be on their health insurance .
Children can be covered under an existing health insurance plan the moment they are born . Dependent children can stay on a parent 's health plan until age 26 . Many children in America are covered under their State 's Medicaid -LRB- or comparable -RRB- program due to financial constraints of the family . However , everyone has the right to purchase coverage on of off exchange as long as they have the means to pay for it . Having just had a baby girl only 2 months ago our Daughter was immediately put on to our group health plan through my Wife 's employer and we had 30 days to decide whether we wanted to pay the additional premium and add her .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does AAA Offer Homeowners Insurance ?
I do n't know about homeowner policy availability through AAA in every State but I can speak personally for Florida . They are my homeowner carrier in Florida . Their rate was reasonably competitive and the coverages are good . The customer service was great . Therefore , since Florida is one of the least favorite States for top insurers to do business in , I would think that the chances are good they are available in most States . If you are an AAA Member , you have a chance to get a good carrier .
AM Best S&P Moody 's Fitch Comdex 1 Teachers Ins & Ann Assoc A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100 2 Northwestern Mutual Life Ins A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100 3 Massachusetts Mutual Life Ins A + + AA + Aa2 AA + 98 4 New York Life Ins Co A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100 5 New York Life Ins & Ann A + + AA + Aaa AAA 100
Yes , AAA does offer term life insurance directly to consumers . They have a rating of A - from A.M.Best , the life insurance rating company . However , unlike homeowners or auto coverage , no carrier can offer a discount for life insurance . You will find many carriers less expensive and with higher financial ratings than AAA . Find a good independent life insurance agent that can help with your coverage .
You can get renter 's insurance through the AAA insurance agency , but your AAA membership does not automatically include renter 's insurance . You can contact AAA or another independent insurance agent and they can compare quotes among several different carriers . It is often cheaper to purchase both renters and auto insurance through the same company as they will provide discounts for multiple policies .
Yes , AAA -LRB- American Automobile Association -RRB- does offer life insurance . In order to compare AAA 's life insurance prices to the quotes from other companies , visit a website that offers instant life insurance quotes . Be sure to compare `` apples to apples '' , such as guarantees and prices at the actual health rating that you will be rated with each company .
AAA Term life insurance has the same guarantees of most Term life insurance . As of June , 2012 , their company 's AM Best rating is A - . To compare rates with AAA Term life insurance , go to a website offering instant life insurance quotes . Also , be sure to review the health requirements needed for AAA life insurance before applying . If you apply and are declined , it will go on your MIB and could make it more difficult to purchase some other life insurance policies .
As of June , 2012 , the AM Best rating for AAA life insurance was A - . It 's Term insurance is competitive and has the same guarantees as most life insurance companies . It does require fairly good health to get the Term insurance , although they offer Whole Life that covers more health conditions . Rather than rely on the quotes of one carrier , you might find a better price shopping multiple carriers , as you can get via one agency or online website . That way , you will have someone that can guide you to another product if you do not qualify or do n't care for AAA has to offer .
I do n't know about homeowner policy availability through AAA in every State but I can speak personally for Florida . They are my homeowner carrier in Florida . Their rate was reasonably competitive and the coverages are good . The customer service was great . Therefore , since Florida is one of the least favorite States for top insurers to do business in , I would think that the chances are good they are available in most States . If you are an AAA Member , you have a chance to get a good carrier .
AAA is an A rated insurance provider and offers a good homeowners policy . I always recommend when shopping for homeowners insurance that you do your research and check several companies as there are different policy types with coverage 's and exclusions that you will want to look at . An independent insurance agent is an excellent resource who can help you navigate through all the details of policy offerings .
Every rating agency has their own ratings . With AM Best , A + + is their best rating . With Fitch , their highest rating is AAA . Moody 's highest rating is Aaa . S&P 's best life insurance company rating is AAA . Weiss 's highest rating is A + . The companies with the best ratings will have high ratings from all these agencies .
There is no one top rated life insurance company , but every life insurance company has the chance to earn the top ratings from several different rating companies . That being said , only a small % of companies get the top rating . To find a company 's rating , you can go to their website and hit the `` About Us '' tab . The main rating companies are AM Best -LRB- for which A + + is their top rating -RRB- , S&P -LRB- for which AAA is highest -RRB- , Fitch -LRB- also uses AAA for best rating -RRB- and Moody 's -LRB- Aaa is their top rating -RRB- .
That is a great question ! I 'm assuming that you are talking about the offer for `` up to $ 200,000 of term life insurance at members only group rates '' ? Any offers like this that you receive , or see advertised on television are offered by reputable companies , and are valid policies . Are they good for you , is the better question . In AAA 's case , -LRB- and I just happen to have a copy of their ad here , I use it for teaching purposes -RRB- there are a couple of things to look at that this type of advertised policy does , that a typical life insurance policy would n't . First , the small print tells you that this policy ends when you turn 80 . If you live to be 80 and a day , you have no coverage . If you look at the nicely colored chart with the ages and prices , you will see that every 5 years they increase , often pretty dramatically . The small print again tells us that your monthly rate increases to be whatever your age bracket becomes . So at age 64 , you pay a price , at 65 , it increases to the new price until you turn 70 , when it increases again . It is good in that if you can get through the few health questions , you are `` approved '' , unless of course the authorization that you okay in the small print turns up something in your health history that either denies your coverage , or increases your rate . Please understand that in no way am I disrespecting AAA or anyone else who advertises this kind of policy , because all of these things are clearly stated , and the assumption is that you the consumer can understand them , and by purchasing them , are accepting the terms of the policy , as legally stated . I wholeheartedly advise that you find a local agent who can show you what you would pay over your lifetime for this policy , and give you a few other policies to compare it to . Please , whatever you do , do NOT fill out a bunch of different ones , hoping one will be approved ! The exact opposite happens a great amount of the time . If you would like more details , please contact me , I will make time for you to discuss this privately . Thank you for asking !
AAA Life Insurance Company has a rating of A - by AM Best as of May 31 , 2013 . They offer several types of life insurance products and premiums are guaranteed level , which is a good feature to have . It can be difficult to get AAA life insurance with some health conditions .
AAA while being best known for its ' auto towing services and for those of us old enough to remember , their tripticket map service , does indeed sell term insurance . However their are many carriers with higher financial ratings that charge less . In fact , I once had a client who worked for AAA but decided on a less expensive policy with better ratings and a lower cost .
AAA does not offer Long Term Care Insurance themselves . Rather , they will provide quotes from a number of companies that offer it , such as Genworth , Mutual of Omaha , and Prudential . To get quotes from these companies by talking to an agent , call any broker offering Long Term Care insurance .
AAA does not offer Disability Insurance . They do offer Life Insurance and Annuities along with Auto and RV insurance . To get a Disability Insurance quote , contact a website or agency that looks trustworthy and visit with an agent to see whether they can shop several Disability Insurance policies to find your best rate .
AAA has auto insurance in many states and their rates are typically very competitive . Although they are mostly known for towing and labor benefits along with travel guides , they do have an insurance wing that is very reputable . A licensed broker can provide quotes from AAA and many other highly-rated carriers .
Jim has pointed out some excellent features of AAA life insurance that you should know before buying AAA 's coverage . I would like to add that it is also easy to be declined for their life insurance , and that being declined by them can keep you from getting other coverage for which you would otherwise qualify . I reiterate that it is up to you to read the fine print before mailing in your application . If you are unsure whether you qualify , or do not understand the conditions of this type of coverage , call one of us on this website and we will be happy to explain it to you . Thanks for asking .
There are six rating services that monitor and assign financial strength or claims paying ability rankings : A.M Best , S&P , Moodys Fitch , Comdex and Weiss . A.M. Best measures claims paying ability , the rest financial stability or strength . The highest A.M. Best rating is AA + . The highest S&P rating is AAA , but when the U.S. government was downgraded by S&P , so were the AAA rated life insurance companies . There are public forums online on the web where you can obtain the ratings of most life insurance companies that manufacture annuities .
Home insurance can be obtained numerous property and casualty insurance companies . If you currently have auto insurance , you may start with that company as having both auto and homeowners policies with the same company can provide discounts that reduce your overall cost . You can also get quotes online from companies such as State Farm , Farmer 's , Liberty Mutual , and Allstate . While these companies will provide quotes for their own companies , getting a quote from an insurance broker or AAA insurance can provide quotes from several different companies and may provide your best opportunity to find the lowest cost . Be sure to speak to an experienced insurance agent to ensure you have proper coverage . Just because once company has the lowest price does n't make it your best option . Be sure understand deductibles and riders such as earthquake insurance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Has The Best Whole Life Insurance Rates ?
There 's no one company that offers the `` best '' whole life rates . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . There are a number of factors that go into the calculation of rates for a policy , but that 's only one area to think about . Some carriers may offer participating whole life policies -LRB- paying dividends that can be used to buy paid-up additions , reduce the premiums , or pay cash to the policyowner -RRB- - other whole life policies may be non-participating -LRB- meaning they do not pay any dividends -RRB- . Another factor determining which program will be best for your needs is the risk class . People may qualify for different risk classes with each carrier because each person has a different medical history and each carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines -LRB- some carriers may be more aggressive in their underwriting and others may be more conservative -RRB- . You 'll want to consult with an independent life insurance agent/broker who can compare multiple companies to see who will offer you the lowest rates for what program you 're looking to set up .
When comparing all insurance policies , especially whole life policies premium rates are only one variable to consider . Engaging the services of an independent agent / broker would help you find the right policy at the right price . If you are comparing whole life and the policy is non-participating example you can compare premium and the guaranteed cash value . This type of policy does not share receive dividends -LRB- the divisible surplus -RRB- . If you are comparing are whole life participating policy , then it is eligible for dividends . In this case , you will need to look at a company 's financials . Dividends are of course are not guaranteed . Availability of riders that can be added and premium payment period should also be considered . Unfortunately , I can not answer your question specifically without more information . I suggest you work with an agent / broker . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
All the above answers are good and correct . If you mean which company offers the lowest premiums for Whole Life , I would answer that in my experience , Mass Mutual , then the Guardian , and then NY Life . All 3 are mutual companies and their Whole Life policies receive dividends in addition to the guaranteed interest on the cash value portion of the policies . If you mean which company has the best performance with regard to their whole life policies cash values , again in my experience and to my knowledge the same 3 companies I named above and add NorthWestern and Sun Life . Of course what I like is the combination of lower premium and higher dividend interest rates that also buy more insurance while at the same time growing the cash value .
The best life insurance rate is the one on the policy that is in force on the day of the claim . Price is really not the issue if the policy isnt in force . If the policy was in force but expired because the term of the policy expired , that wasnt a good buy either . Determine how long you will want the coverage and purchase a policy from an agent that you trust .
Whole life insurance rates actually vary more for the individual purchasing them than the insurance company itself . There are so many factors that go into calculating premiums for whole life insurance such as age , build , health , life style , etc. . I recommend finding an independent life insurance broker to professionally shop the market for the best product at the best rate for your unique situation . Their services are free to you as a consumer .
Who has the cheapest life insurance or rather who has the best rates for life insurance ? The company that has the best rates for insurance at a particular age and for a specified amount varies . No one company has all the best rates . Perhaps the best way to answer this is to change the question to : How do I find the best rates for term insurance ? You could start with an online quoting service to give you a point of reference . Be sure and compare renewal rates along with the initial premium . There are more factors to consider than simply price . Which is why you would best be served by working with an independent insurance broker who can access several companies to get you the right plan at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
There 's no one company that offers the `` best '' whole life rates . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . There are a number of factors that go into the calculation of rates for a policy , but that 's only one area to think about . Some carriers may offer participating whole life policies -LRB- paying dividends that can be used to buy paid-up additions , reduce the premiums , or pay cash to the policyowner -RRB- - other whole life policies may be non-participating -LRB- meaning they do not pay any dividends -RRB- . Another factor determining which program will be best for your needs is the risk class . People may qualify for different risk classes with each carrier because each person has a different medical history and each carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines -LRB- some carriers may be more aggressive in their underwriting and others may be more conservative -RRB- . You 'll want to consult with an independent life insurance agent/broker who can compare multiple companies to see who will offer you the lowest rates for what program you 're looking to set up .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Video Transcript : Next question is , `` What are the best whole life companies ? '' Well , I have to divide that into a couple of sections . One is , what are the best whole life companies for indemnification ? And what are the best whole life companies if you 're using this for supplemental income ? There are several great carriers out there that are really good dividend paying whole life contracts . If you 're using it for indemnification , you want to look at the most benevolent underwriter , because that 's the game that has to be played in permanent whole life , because you 're going to be paying this premium for the rest of your life . So , I want to find out from an indemnification or protection point of view , who gives me the best number because of my health consideration ? The secondary part is , if I 'm using whole life for an actual income play , I want to be able to use whole life and a contract that actually is going to give me more rate of return . And that 's how I look at it ; is it income , or is it indemnification ?
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
First of all , whole life insurance is for what all forms of life insurance are for , to pay a cash benefit to the policy 's beneficiaries upon the death of the policyholder . Without getting into the whole term life insurance versus permanent life insurance debate , whole life insurance policies are generally designed to build up what is called `` cash value '' over the years that the policy is in effect . This cash value may accrue in addition to the face value -LRB- death benefit amount -RRB- of the life insurance policy . For example , a $ 100,000 face value whole life policy that has accumulated $ 10,000 in cash value at the time of the policyholder 's death would pay out $ 110,000 . In some cases this cash value can also be accessed by the policyholder or taken out as a loan to be paid back if the policyholder has a need to access this asset . Another aspect of a whole life policy is that you can fully pay for a whole life policy and have it in effect for the rest of your life with no further premiums required . This may be accomplished with a one time lump sum payment of premium or payment over a specified period of years . This assures the policyholder that they have life insurance protection in their later years when their ability to pay monthly insurance premiums may be severely reduced or even eliminated . This is in contrast to term life insurance which covers the policyholder for the specified term -LRB- time period -RRB- of the policy -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- and then ceases to be in effect , has built up no cash value and leaves the policyholder uninsured unless they have made other arrangements . Term life insurance does have the advantage of being less expensive than whole life insurance and other forms of permanent life insurance . Personally , I believe that people should have a mix of term and permanent life insurance protection in place during the course of their lives but this is a discussion you should have with your financial advisor and insurance agent to determine the best strategy for your needs .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
Most agents who sell Term Life Insurance also sell Whole Life . The exception may be some of the `` term shops '' on the internet . Final expense policies are usually Whole Life , so agents specializing in Senior life insurance would carry Whole Life . These usually have under $ 100,000 face amounts . `` Captive '' agencies -LRB- where they sell products for one company -RRB- usually have good Whole Life products for persons looking for larger face amounts . So do agencies that sell multiple products , but you need to consult with a licensed agent who understands Whole Life . A good way to start would be to call and ask for an agent who can compare a couple of Whole Life policies for you in detail . If they are unable to do that , move on to the next one .
A whole life insurance policy is an extremely flexible product that can meet many needs in retirement . The most obvious need is death . It is obvious that retirement always ends in death . Death is not inexpensive . The proceeds of a whole life insurance policy can pay off some or all of those expenses . After a certain age term policies can not be written at any price . I recently had a client who forgot that there was a life policy on her husband . She was paying his funeral expenses on an installment plan . I discovered the policy and brought it to her attention . She was delighted . Another use of a whole life policy is to transfer property to heirs . Often a person will want to leave money to children , grandchildren or a favorite charity . They will then try to conserve their retirement assets so that money will be available when the die . Unfortunately they often rob themselves of lifes simple pleasures in their drive to provide that inheritance . A life insurance policy can do that at the beginning of retirement leaving the person the balance of assets to spend as they wish . Some people have estates that are subject to estate tax . The problem with estate tax is that if there isnt cash to pay the taxes , assets are often sold at below market value to pay the tax . Having cash can make the difference of keeping the family business going , maintaining the family farm or closing them up for taxes . Since that can happen at any time , a whole life policy is particularly flexible in that regard . Whole life insurance is often used when a person wants to leave a specific valuable asset to one child but wants to treat all the children in the same manner . The heirs that are not going to get that valuable asset could receive equivalent proceeds from a whole life policy and everyone would be happy . A whole life policy is often used to purchase the interest of another party in a business . In this case the surviving partners dont particularly want to share everything with a widow who may not be acquainted with the business . A whole life policy can provide the cash to take care of that situation by giving the survivors the funds they need to purchase the widows interests . Sometimes whole life insurance is used to fund day to day living expenses in retirement . I just finished a comparison that showed that a whole life policy performed as well as a fixed annuity in accumulating money for retirement and that it did that with the promise to pay the full benefit should the person die before retiring . The whole life policy has non-forfeiture provisions which can pay a lifetime stream of income if desired or the policy would also give the person the flexibility to use the policy in other ways depending upon future , unforeseen events . This may sound strange but I often get requests for whole life insurance from older individuals . They seem to appreciate the value of lasting protection at a fixed price .
Owning whole life insurance is a wise decision . The next closest rival is term life insurance and companies dont issue term life insurance policies that extend out to life expectancy . Term life insurance policies rarely pay their death benefit . Whole life insurance has tax advantages not enjoyed by other financial assets . It has legal advantages . It has financial advantages . Term insurance can not offer the major advantages because of its limited duration . If the consumer has needs that continue for the remainder of their lives then whole life insurance is the answer . My experience is that as people advance in age they find more uses for whole life insurance , not fewer .
I do n't think you can state whole life is actually better than term life insurance or term life insurance is better than whole life . It just depends on the need by you , the client . There are many different product options when it comes to life insurance . There is the right product for practically every situation . The true use of whole life is when there is a level premium need for life insurance your `` whole life '' hence the name . However , whole life insurance has become the Swiss Army knife of life insurance . The riders and cash value can be used for critical illness , terminal illness , children 's college funds to retirement benefits . There are now lots of uses for whole life insurance . Term life insurance is meant more to cover a need for a fixed amount of time . There are term limits that vary from annually to 5 years , 10 years , 15 years , 20 years , 25 years , 30 years and even 35 years . You may also set a premium on a universal life plan that does n't build cash value other than to level your premiums as far as age 151 years old . The main thing to consider which type of life insurance you need is to first identify your need for life insurance . A wise man once shared , you should buy life insurance like you will die tomorrow and invest like you will live forever . Find an experienced independent broker to help you identify your needs and shop the market for the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
what is the best type of life insurance for young people ? In my opinion dividend paying whole life is the best choice for young people who have not yet put themselves in such debt that the option of whole life has to take a back seat to debt protection . For young people whole life is a great choice as the price is cheap , the benefit is large and the price is locked in . It is the absolute best window of opportunity to take advantage of what whole life can do .
When shopping for Medicare Supplement do not just go by rates . Many agents will tell you that all plans are the same and the only difference is rates , and that is true . However , I have seen many companies go in to an area with rates that are low , only to raise the rates by 30 % or more the following year . Unless you like changing plans every year and you know your health will always be good , this is not necessarily the best way to go . Look for a company that is competitive , but that has a good history of rate increases , generally less than 10 % . Every agent is getting solicited by companies wanting them to sell their now lowest rate plan . Find a good local agent who has been around for a while . I personally like the AARP Med Sup . It is competitive and has an excellent rate history . It also uses community rating versus attained age rating . With attained age , which most companies use , you pay a low rate at first but every year you can count on a rate increase just because you got older , in addition to the rate increase the company has . With community rating , the rates are equaled over the ages so that you pay a little more at 65 for example but when you are 85 your rates will be lower than if you went with an attained age company . Also look for an agent that also does Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug plans . He will be able to help you decide which would be to your best advantage .
Term Life Insurance is a temporary policy with very few moving parts . It has no cash value ; pays no dividends ; can not be paid off early ; and when the term is up , it goes way up in price , or else the policy simply ends . As such , it also usually costs less per thousand dollars of coverage than Whole Life costs . Whole Life accumulates cash value that can be borrowed from , used to pay the policy premium in later years , or collected if the policy is surrendered . It may pay periodic dividends . Whole Life policy premiums can be paid over one 's lifetime , or in one single premium , or over a set number of years . The biggest difference between Term and Whole Life is that Whole Life is permanent insurance that will last your `` whole '' lifetime . With these features , Whole Life usually has a higher premium than Term Life , although it is possible that if you keep buying new Term policies throughout your life , the cumulative premium of Whole Life may be lower than the sum total of all the Term policies , especially if your health declined over the years .
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
What Does Dave Ramsey Say About Cancer Insurance ?
Dave Ramsey does not think you should buy cancer insurance or any type of specific dread disease insurance . He confuses the purpose of it with major medical health insurance . Your major medical pays your doctor bills -LRB- minus your deductibles , co-pays and premiums . -RRB- Your cancer insurance pays a lump sum amount directly to you . You can use this while you are off work with cancer to pay for food , house payment , medical bills or anything else you need . Dave Ramsey is not a good resource for insurance information .
I love Dave Ramsey . I listen to him and have attended his financial peace university and let me tell you , great advise . I even have his book sitting on my desk as I type this . However I can not speak on behalf Dave Ramsey but if I recall correctly Dave would say do n't spend your money on a fancy car but instead build your wealth first . Dave 's saying is `` Live like no one else so later you can live like non one else '' . Also he would say carry high liability limits to protect your assets and the highest deductibles you can afford unless a higher deductible does not make a significant enough premium difference . I would recommend hisfinancialpeace series and book and then I would go ask Dave what he thinks about auto insurance .
Dave Ramsey does not think you should buy cancer insurance or any type of specific dread disease insurance . He confuses the purpose of it with major medical health insurance . Your major medical pays your doctor bills -LRB- minus your deductibles , co-pays and premiums . -RRB- Your cancer insurance pays a lump sum amount directly to you . You can use this while you are off work with cancer to pay for food , house payment , medical bills or anything else you need . Dave Ramsey is not a good resource for insurance information .
What does Dave Ramsey think of Annuities ? Not really sure as I do n't follow Dave Ramsey that much . Dave is the current financial `` guru '' gracing the airwaves . There were many before Dave and there will be many after Dave . While Dave 's message about getting out of debt and staying out of debt is a fine one , similar to the one my mom told me many years ago , Dave does n't always understand financial products that well as honest advice on them might conflict with his message .
I have read one of Dave Ramseys books but I am certainly not an expert . I think Dave Ramsey would say to have the amount of life insurance that you need in place when the need arises . A policy that has expired or is inadequate defeats the purpose of life insurance . While I realize that Dave Ramsey advocates term insurance , the key remains the same . Make sure you have enough when the need arises . If you investments reduce your risk and need for life insurance , that is fine but make sure that you have the risk covered . You are valuable and you love people who will be hurt terribly if you dont make it home today .
Dave Ramsey says to only consider variable annuties if you are totally debt free and have used all your tax-deferred options . Make sure you understand the fees , riders , options and surrender period associated with your annuity . Use these four mutual funds : 1 -RRB- growth , 2 -RRB- international , 3 -RRB- growth and income , and 4 -RRB- aggressive growth . Finally , Dave Ramsey says to never use annuities inside retirement options .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
Dave Ramsey 's concept is that you should buy term and invest the difference . Since term insurance is less expensive initially , investing the difference in cost between term insurance and whole life insurance you will receive a greater return . In principle and theory he is right . In actual practice , statistics show that people buy term with this in mind but do not follow through on the investment portion . The result is that people are left with no insurance in their later years , because term insurance premiums increase in later years and become unaffordable . Often they end up with less savings than they would have had if they had purchased whole life . When you consider the tax friendliness of whole life , probate avoidance , and other factors Whole Life often in reality comes out on top . Dave Ramsey 's concept is not new , it has been around since A.L. Williams in the early 1980 's . Unless a person is extremely disciplined and has enough liquid cash flow , the concept of buy term and invest the difference has historically not worked for most people . Life happens , emergencies come up , expenses rise and the investment part of the plan is put on the back burner . I know some of my colleagues will disagree with me . They point to numbers on illustrations that look good in theory . I am not saying the concept wo n't work . I am pointing out the reality that unless a person truly follows through on the plan , historically it has n't for many . I see too many people end up with no insurance in their later years when they need it most . You should have at least a solid base of Whole Life . Life Insurance is not a good investment in fact it is not an investment . It is a good semi-compulsory way to save money for a later date while at the same time providing an immediate estate should you die too soon .
Dave Ramsey recommends term insurance . He endorses a specific agency . He emphasizes adequate coverage which I consider essential in any type of financial planning . Not everyone will adapt their finances to Dave Ramseys model . For those who do not it would be wise to consult with a qualified agent and determine the best way to provide the protection that you need . It could be that the answer will be term insurance but for many it is other forms of life insurance . Each of us is unique and one program does not meet the needs of everyone . There is a subculture that lives near my agency that rarely purchases term life insurance .
Dave Ramsey recommends having eight to ten times your income in term life insurance . There are a number of life insurance carriers that offer the term life insurance products that Dave Ramsey recommends , and those products can be purchased on many different websites on the internet ... the price is the same for the same product .
As a guest speaker at may Dave Ramsey classes , I 'm quite familiar with Dave 's perspective on term life versus whole life . Simply put , Dave is an advocate for getting the maximum amount of life insurance you can to protect the most valuable asset your family hasyour income . Term Life Insurance delivers the biggest `` bang for your buck '' when it comes to pure death benefit for the dollar you spend . There are many cash value benefits from a whole life policy . However , Dave 's guiding principles are to use the money that would go towards the whole life guarantees and cash value options of a whole life policy in a different form of investment . For many people , term life insurance is an appropriate solution .
That is a great question ! Yes , Dave Ramsey does like term insurance . In Dave 's world , people actually save money , and keep enough on hand to be able to cover their burial expenses . They also are able to find tax-advantaged ways to transfer wealth to their loved ones . With 55 % of American Elder Citizens living in poverty , 66 % of our children living in poverty , and the majority of Americans living without any savings at all , I 'm not sure how well his world translates into the real one . Dave has a great program , and some solid financial advice , but if you can not save money , term will be the best choice for you only if you are too poor to afford any real coverage . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Yes , Dave Ramsey does recommend Disability Insurance . In fact he considers Long Term Disability Insurance a necessity for most full time workers . He recommends buying it through your work place if that is available . If not offered there , he says to try an association , and then buy privately if unable to get through an association . But buy it .
That is a great question ! I did n't think she liked much of anything , except big piles of cash ! -LRB- I 'm joking , of course -RRB- My guess is that she likes it for the same reason that Dave Ramsey does - it 's cheaper than whole life , if you need to purchase life insurance at all . In their worlds , -LRB- think middle to upper middle class and higher -RRB- , you should purchase term life insurance , save or invest the difference of what your whole life would have cost , and hope that you die within the term period . Some people are able to do that , and so the financial guru 's smell like roses with their good advice . I hope that helps , -LRB- and no offense meant , Mr. Ramsey or Ms. Orman -RRB- , thanks for asking !
Another good source to read -LRB- from Dave Ramsey -RRB- is this : WEBSITELINK . He goes in depth about the top four must-have insurance policies , along with why each is necessary . As Peggy said above , Dave Ramsey DOES suggest you get long term care insurance , and that you should start bygetting it from your work , if possible .
Dave Ramsey recommends a lot of things that many financial experts agree and disagree with . Ramsey believes in term insurance , which is an appropriate choice in many situations . But not all situations . The best resource for determining ho much coverage you need and what carriers are the best choice , is an experienced broker . No fees and no hassle . just the best information .
Great question . Dave Ramsey on his radio show that i listen to when I am in the car he like term life insurance . He like 20 year term life . That is good life insurance for the least cost . If you die in the term lets say year 19 you passed away the policy would pay your kids or wife the death amount .
Dave Ramsey generally suggests that someone carry 10 times their current annual income in life insurance . This means if you earn $ 50,000 per year , Dave would recommend that you purchase $ 500,000 in life insurance . Whether or not this is an adequate amount of life insurance depends on a few different factors regarding your financial situation . In actuality you may need more or less .
Dave Ramsey recommends term life insurance . Dave is a buy term and invest the difference proponent . He believes in eliminating all debt and that over the years your investment in the stock marketing will accumulate enough money to fund a retirement account debt free . So , the need for permanent life insurance is unnecessary .
Allegedly , Dave Ramsey is not a big fan of annuities . He believes in limiting and as quickly as possible , eliminating debts . But Mr. Ramsey is simply one voice among many who have opinions of annuities . A Certified Financial Planner will provide you with unbiased advice regarding the suitability of annuities in your portfolio .
end question
start question
annuities
Will Annuity Rates Improve In The Future ?
No one knows the answer to that . But interest rates generally have cycles . Presently the government is artificially suppressing interest rates , but it seems reasonable that rates must rise eventually . Many financial planners are locking down interest rate periods of five years or less which may be an indication of their belief that interest rates will rise within the decade .
There are two rates to consider . The rate of interest earned on accumulations changes all the time . Most contracts have a guaranteed interest rate but companies actually pay a new money rate . As the interest environment changes these rates change to remain competitive . The provisions for payout are in the contract and do not change , however , future contracts might have significantly lower rates due to the ever increasing longevity of the population .
Annuity Rates will most likely improve over the next 5 years , however , there is no guarantee . Annuity Rates are heavily dependent on the 10 year Treasury along with the Fed Funds Rate . Currently , these are both at historical lows . Annuity Rates are currently at a historical low along with them . Most economists agree that the 10y Treasury & Fed Rates will increase over the next 2-10 years . If this happens , Annuity Rates will increase along with them .
Bonus annuities are annuities that pay a bonus to the contract owner generally as an incentive to start the annuity . This bonus is generally paid as bonus to the interest rate in the first year of the annuity . These benefits can greatly improve yield on the cash in the annuity . Some care should be taken when considering these annuities as they often come with recapture charges if the owner cashes in the annuity within a few years from opening it -LRB- i.e. the bonus will be forfeited -RRB- .
It seems that annuities are always evolving and hopefully improving . The latest push appears to be coming in the form of guaranteeing minimum incomes at different ages in the future with either an upfront lump sum of money or annual contributions . -LRB- Remember the guarantees are backed by the claims paying ability of Life Insurance company . -RRB- Another area is often called `` linked benefits '' where that guaranteed income is increased if you ca n't do two of the six activities of daily life-which is also known as qualifying for long term care . While these benefits are n't designed to replace long term care insurance they will provide additional income to help defray those costs . I expect these types of changes will continue to evolve . If there is something more specific you 'd like to have addressed , just let us know .
It sounds like you have a decision to make : A. postpone or cancel your elective weight loss surgery so that you can get the life insurance now , or B.postpone getting life insurance until after you have your weight loss surgery . If you have found a policy for which you qualify weight wise , are not suffering health complications from your weight , and need $ 900,000 of coverage for a loan or other reason , you could probably qualify by simply postponing your surgery for a year . Of course , if your health is at risk , getting the surgery can not only help your health , but improve your life insurance rates in the future .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
The only type of life insurance available to people with HIV at this point in time is guaranteed issue life insurance . This type of coverage is graded , only provides small face amounts -LRB- usually under $ 25,000 -RRB- and usually has a minimum age requirement of 45 years . Hopefully this is one of those health conditions that life insurance will look at more leniently in the future as HIV treatments continue to improve .
-- > Normal 0 Im sure your insurance company would say yes to that question and I would say most homeowners will find their premium does increase each year . Usually there are two reasons . Insurers increase their rates and insurers tend to increase the amount of insurance on your home by inflationary factors tied to increased construction costs in your area . But that doesnt mean your premium has to increase every year , it means it may be time to take a closer look at your policy and premium . If you want your policy to pay to rebuild your home if it is destroyed and the cost to rebuild your home has increased , increasing the amount of insurance may be appropriate . But increasing the amount of insurance does not necessarily mean your premium must increase . You may be entitled to additional credits for not filing any claims , structural updates or improvements or added security . Maybe your credit score has improved and you are eligible for more favorable rating treatment . You may even want to check with other insurers to see if they offer more favorable terms . But bottom line , there is no reason your homeowners insurance premium should go up each year . You just have to take a look at it , find out why and see what your alternatives are .
Sometimes cheapest is not always better . Remember , you get what you pay for . If you go to a website that only provides you with a few cheap quotes you may not be getting the best products available . Sometimes those sites are not kept current with changing products . What if you have questions or issues with the application or the insurance policy itself ? In a lot of cases it is difficult to get in contact with a licensed agent to get those questions answered or the problems corrected . Generally speaking , it is the service work a particular agent provides the customer that makes the difference in these instances . Furthermore , your agent will be able to help you customize your insurance to meet your specific needs and budget . Your agent should be able to get a good foundation product for you . Then , you can add to it as your finances improve . Plus , your agent will be able to assist you with future decisions about your insurance portfolio as you reach other milestones in you life . A relationship with your insurance agent should be a life-long relationship that way he or she will be able to help with items after the initial purchase of the policy such as : possible loans , riders , and claims .
Can you negotiate Term Life Insurance ? That is a great question . Many people think that life insurance companies hold sales , and ads can easily give people that impression . But life insurance actually has set rates , and the only negotiable part may -LRB- or may not -RRB- be what you are rated . Most life insurance companies must justify to their reinsurer -LRB- s -RRB- the rating that they give an applicant , which means sticking to underwriting guidelines . That is why you can often get a better rate by shopping with an agency that carries many different companies , because you can take advantage of a variety of underwriting guidelines and find the one that works best for you . Sometimes , when a rating is given , extra information can be provided to the underwriter to convince him/her to improve the rating . Sometimes knowing that another company rated you better can help bump your rating up . These are possibilities that could result in you paying a lower price . But how the life insurance itself is priced is not negotiable .
Can you get life insurance if you have diabetes ? Decades ago the answer was only `` no '' . As treatment for diabetes has improved and the wide range of how well diabetic manage their condition the prospects have changed . Depending on your level of control the possibility of aquiring a policy have improved greatly .
Homeowners insurance will cover any improvements that you make to the home . However you will need to call your agent to discuss the improvements so that they can be documented on your policy . Your policy should always have all the correct characteristics documented so there are no problems in the event of a claim . Also you can discuss any potential discounts that may be available due to the upgrades .
There are three levels of Nursing Care , Skilled , Intermediate , and Custodial . Skilled Nursing care requires that you need the services of a licensed professional and that your health can improve by utilizing those services . For example , physical therapy , occupational therapy , and speech therapy would fall under those categories . Custodial Care means that you are not going to improve . You just need the assistance of others to perform certain activities of daily living . Medicare only pays for Skilled Nursing and is limited to 100 days .
HSIP is intended to improve access to major surgical procedure andto as an incentive for general surgeons to participate within specific time frames . The following is the actual description you get when you Google Medicare HSIP : HSIP was created to improve access to major surgical procedures -LRB- surgical procedures with a 10 day or 90 day global period -RRB- for Medicare patients in a HSPA area . To be eligible for the HSIP incentive , a physician must be enrolled in Medicare as a General Surgeon -LRB- specialty 02 -RRB- . The HSIP incentive is effective for services provided on or after January 1 , 2011 , and before January 1 , 2016 . Incentive payments earned under HSIP will be combined with incentive payments earned under other quarterly incentive programs and issued as a single check .
Coverage A-Dwelling , on your declaration page is the amount of money your home is insured for against covered perils . How much should your limit be ? It should be the amount of money you need to rebuild your house from scratch . That amount of money is called Replacement Cost . How do you determine the Replacement Cost Value ? To determine the Replacement Cost Value , you need to know or measure the square footage of your home . You also need to know the special features of your home , like skylights , central vacuums , etc. . You also need to know the quality of your improvements . For example , are your kitchen and bathroom fixtures Builders Grade or Luxury ? If you can gather that information , call your agent and review it with them . They should be able to help you come up with a reasonable estimate of your homes replacement value . You should revisit the value every three to five years or after you make a significant improvement . You want to keep pace with your homes value , but you dont want to over insurance and waste money . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
Best answer : six months old . Hopefully , your parents did this for you . Hopefully , they bought you a nice whole life policy at a ridiculously low premium . A guaranteed premium . For your lifetime . Since it is a lifetime contract , you have lots of time to grow both the cash values and the survivor benefit . They can both grow to enormous numbers if you let them . If your parents did this for you , more power to you . If not , its not too late for you to do this for your children and grandchildren . Next best answer : now . You are single ? It doesnt matter . You dont have any dependents ? It doesnt matter . You dont have any obligations ? It doesnt matter . The price will never be lower than it is now . Even if you are in perfect health , if you wait just two years to make the purchase , the price will be higher simply due to age . Why pay extra ? Whats that ? You have a pre-existing condition and want to wait until it improves or stabilizes ? Not a good idea . What happens if it gets worse ? Then you are out of luck . If you want life insurance , get it . You may end up paying more now . But if your health does improve , then you can re-shop the coverage and replace the current policy with a cheaper one . And if unfortunately you dont get better , then at least you will have a policy in force . To protect your spouse , or pay off the mortgage , or cover your business debt , or for any of the many other reasons you will need life insurance later on .
In general , you can not negotiate life insurance . The rates are set at a certain cost per thousand dollars of coverage , and there is no bargaining allowed to reduce that cost . However , if you are rated higher than you think is fair , you can use an experienced life insurance agent to go to bat for you . You may be able to get a letter from your doctor that helps the underwriter see your health in a better light . You may be able to provide additional medical records or testing to improve your rating . You might possibly even be able to obtain a lower rating from one company on the grounds of what another company rated you .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
end question
start question
health-insurance
When Do Companies Have To Offer Health Insurance ?
No one is required to offer health insurance , but employers are strongly encouraged to offer it as a way of attracting people to come work for them . Depending on how many employees there are for a given company , the employer may be subject to employer shared responsibility payments if they do n't offer group coverage and meet enrollment requirements . Employers also often offer group health insurance because they can get certain tax deductions and tax credits for doing so and enrolling employees . If you want to look into setting up a group health plan to offer your employees -LRB- or want to review your existing coverage to see if something better is available -RRB- , you want to work with an experienced health insurance broker . There 's many moving parts to group coverage . We have in-depth knowledge of the products available and can help design a policy that is suitable to your needs , your budget , and will offer great coverage to your staff . Please let me know if I can be of assistance . Thanks very much .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
Some will and some wo n't . Employer 's offer health insurance and other benefits to attract and retain quality employees , reduce turnover and to reduce absenteeism . Also , many employer 's feel a moral obligation to offer health insurance and employer sponsored health insurance is a deductible business expense so it does offer tax advantages . That said , with the introduction of the health insurance marketplaces and advanced premium tax subsidies for individual health insurance under Obamacare , these have added a new consideration for some employers . Depending upon the overall income levels of a particular employer 's workforce -LRB- a business with a lot of low to moderate income employees -RRB- it is possible that offering group health insurance could now be a disadvantage to many employees . This is because they may qualify for premium subsidies in the government marketplaces that actually make the cost of insurance less for them than having it provided by their employer . This is a very complicated issue that has a unique answer for each employer . If you would like an analysis of whether offering or continuing to offer group health insurance is right for your workforce please feel free to contact me .
As of today no one has to offer health insurance ! That will change on January 1 , 2015 when employers with 100 or more employees will have to offer health insurance to their employees or pay a penalty -LRB- tax -RRB- . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- requires employers to offer health insurance to employees and dependents that are children but does not require employers to offer health insurance to spouses of employees . On January 1 , 2016 employers with 50-99 employers will be required to offer health insurance .
A health insurance exchange is a government-run marketplace where people can buy health insurance plans . One of the big questions everyone asks is whats the difference between buying a health plan on the exchange and off the exchange ? The key difference is the subsidies . You can only get a subsidy if youre buying your coverage on an exchange they can not be used towards plans purchased off the exchange . An advantage of buying a plan off the exchange is you will generally have more choices available for you to choose from . The same plan that is offered on the exchange and off the exchange may have some differences as well . Plans that are on the exchange may have more regulations , therefore requiring they feature additional benefits directly through the plan as opposed to needing a separate stand alone policy to provide the supplemental benefit -LRB- e.g. vision care , dental care , etc. -RRB- off the exchange plans may not be subject to the same standards . Off the exchange plans must still meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- including offering the 10 essential health benefits -RRB- . Its important to remember than not every plan that is offered off the exchanges will be available on the exchanges . Carriers reserve the right not to offer coverage on the exchanges . Thus , some states may have numerous plan selections for consumers where others may have limited choices . Also , not every type of health insurance plan is available on the exchanges short term policies and large group policies are not offered on exchanges at this time . There 's a lot of moving parts to health insurance and given the issues that have occurred with the new healthcare system rollout , it 's highly recommended you work with an experienced health insurance broker to make sure everything is in good order for your program . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A health insurance exchange is a government-run marketplace where people can buy health insurance plans One of the big questions everyone asks is whats the difference between buying a health plan on the exchange and off the exchange ? The key difference is the subsidies . You can only get a subsidy if youre buying your coverage on an exchange they can not be used towards plans purchased off the exchange . An advantage of buying a plan off the exchange is you will generally have more choices available for you to choose from . The same plan that is offered on the exchange and off the exchange may have some differences as well . Plans that are on the exchange may have more regulations , therefore requiring they feature additional benefits directly through the plan as opposed to needing a separate stand alone policy to provide the supplemental benefit -LRB- e.g. vision care , dental care , etc. -RRB- off the exchange plans may not be subject to the same standards . Off the exchange plans must still meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- including offering the 10 essential health benefits -RRB- . Its important to remember than not every plan that is offered off the exchanges will be available on the exchanges . Carriers reserve the right not to offer coverage on the exchanges . Thus , some states may have numerous plan selections for consumers where others may have limited choices . Also , not every type of health insurance plan is available on the exchanges short term policies and large group policies are not offered on exchanges at this time . There 's a lot of moving parts to health insurance and given the issues that have occurred with the new healthcare system rollout , it 's highly recommended you work with an experienced health insurance broker to make sure everything is in good order for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes . Absent a collective bargaining agreement with a labor union , which are increasingly rare , an employer makes a voluntary decision to offer health insurance and other benefits to their employees . There has never been a legal requirement in our nation for an employer to offer health insurance to their employees . The Affordable Care Act contains provisions that can apply tax penalties to employers above certain group sizes for not offering health insurance or the approved level of coverage and it offers inducements in the form of tax credits to smaller employers to provide health insurancebut even this law does not force an employer to provide health insurance to their employees . So , generally speaking , an employer is free to not offer health insurance to their employees or to terminate an existing group health insurance plan that they have had in effect . Indeed , the higher costs imposed by the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have already had the perverse effect of pushing some employers to the decision to cancel their group health plans .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
A health insurance exchange is a government-run marketplace where people can buy health insurance plans . You have plans choices available that are on the exchanges and off the exchanges . The key difference is the subsidies . You can only get a subsidy if youre buying your coverage on an exchange they can not be used towards plans purchased off the exchange . An advantage of buying a plan off the exchange is you will generally have more choices available for you to choose from . The same plan that is offered on the exchange and off the exchange may have some differences as well . Plans that are on the exchange may have more regulations , therefore requiring they feature additional benefits directly through the plan as opposed to needing a separate stand alone policy to provide the supplemental benefit -LRB- e.g. vision care , dental care , etc. -RRB- off the exchange plans may not be subject to the same standards . Off the exchange plans must still meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- including offering the 10 essential health benefits -RRB- . Its important to remember than not every plan that is offered off the exchanges will be available on the exchanges . Carriers reserve the right not to offer coverage on the exchanges . Thus , some states may have numerous plan selections for consumers where others may have limited choices . Also , not every type of health insurance plan is available on the exchanges short term policies and large group policies are not offered on exchanges at this time . There 's a lot of moving parts to health insurance and given the issues that have occurred with the new healthcare system rollout , it 's highly recommended you work with an experienced health insurance broker to make sure everything is in good order for your program . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The where/who question is a great one !! Our belief at ' I Hate Buying Insurance ' is the UNDERWRITING is the tail that wags the dog -LRB- one of my fav southern sayings -RRB- . There are hundreds of options across the country for Term Life . Each carrier has a different underwriting appetite . Do you have 5 - 10 extra pounds to shed ? That will be a factor between when determining what health tier you qualify for . Most carrier have 4 tiers & are commonly called Standard , Standard Plus , Preferred , and Preferred Plus . Most life insurance shoppers understand that health plays a huge role in determining the `` rate '' you qualify for . Yet lifestyle , occupation , hobbies , family health history , & more play into the rate you qualify for . A top agency will work with dozens of carriers . What name , mascot , or even financial rating -LRB- do n't sweat A - vs. A + + -RRB- are all secondary to getting the best underwriting for your specific needs . One carrier may offer you Standard while a Preferred is available at a second . Another thing to consider as of this writing is a new generation of Term Life called `` Living Benefits Life '' -LRB- LBL -RRB- You DO N'T have to die to use you `` life '' insurance anymore . Several carriers offer the ability to accelerate when diagnosed with a range of Critical or Chronic Illnesses . Just think of it as accessing the bank vault early . If you were diagnosed with invasive cancer , would n't it be to get a large sum of cash to help pay for deductibles , time away from work , home health care , & travel to the hospital you need that is in a different state ? LBL life might just do all that for you My suggestion for shopping Term Life plans : 1 . If the agent or dot.com you call doesnt ask A LOT of questions about health , history , & lifestyle , RUN . All theyre doing is guessing . Accurate rates do NOT come from age , height/weight , & current tobacco use . The agent needs to interview you so youre matched with the right carrier . 2 . Dont be afraid to ask the agent , What underwriting factors lead you to this option vs. any other carrier ? 3 . See if the agent offers you a LBL option . IF NOT , it is my strong opinion that her/she is NOT on top of current trends . If an agent or dot.com is doing what is best for you , several ideas/options should be explored . If you have any questions or comments , reach out to us !
No , statistically around 99 % large companies in the US -LRB- 200 + employees -RRB- offer health benefits , about 96 % of medium companies -LRB- 50-199 employees -RRB- offer health benefits , and about 92 % of small companies -LRB- < 49 employees -RRB- offer health benefits . There may be a significant impact on the small employer statistics as state and federal exchanges become available . However I can confidently say that any such statistical shift in the small employer health benefits market will most likely be a short term -LRB- perhaps 3-5 year -RRB- variation that will in time reflect a very small impact in the % of small businesses offering health benefits . The complex structuring options and technical details will render the small business exchanges as effective at delivering optimal results as online tax software is in helping someone who is not well versed in accounting manage pay-roll and state/federal tax obligations/deductions . Also the businesses who do not provide meaningful benefit programs to their employees will find it hard to compete with the other companies who are able to leverage such programs to provide them with a distinct competitive advantage . That being said the exchanges will revolutionize the marketplace of individual health insurance policies .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Humana is an Insurance company that offers products for Medicare beneficiaries . These product include Medicare Supplements or Medigap insurance for gaps in coverage of Medicare Part A and Part B . These policies have different levels of coverage identified by letters . Humana offers Medicare Advantage policies or Medicare Part C. Medicare Advantage is a private insurance company providing Medicare benefits equal to Medicare Part A and Part B with some additional benefits . You are no longer using your Medicare card for benefits but will use a private insurance card and they pay for your medicare care . You have to check your county to see what Insurance companies offer these plans . Humana offers Medicare Part D which is prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries . Each county offers different plans and you would have to check to see what plans are offered in your county . Medicare is a federal health plan offered to persons who meet the qualifications .
No one is required to offer health insurance , but employers are strongly encouraged to offer it as a way of attracting people to come work for them . Depending on how many employees there are for a given company , the employer may be subject to employer shared responsibility payments if they do n't offer group coverage and meet enrollment requirements . Employers also often offer group health insurance because they can get certain tax deductions and tax credits for doing so and enrolling employees . If you want to look into setting up a group health plan to offer your employees -LRB- or want to review your existing coverage to see if something better is available -RRB- , you want to work with an experienced health insurance broker . There 's many moving parts to group coverage . We have in-depth knowledge of the products available and can help design a policy that is suitable to your needs , your budget , and will offer great coverage to your staff . Please let me know if I can be of assistance . Thanks very much .
With term insurance , you 're getting a lot of `` bang for your buck '' because you 're only buying the coverage for a limited amount of time . There are hundreds of insurance companies in the market that offer term life insurance . One thing you do NOT want to do is just apply to a bunch of companies at the same time . This can often hurt you in your pursuit of coverage because it can be a `` red flag '' to an insurance company -LRB- so-to-speak -RRB- . A critical factor in determining which carrier 's policy is going to work best for you is the risk class they will offer you -LRB- the risk class determines the premiums for your program -RRB- . Each insurance company has their own set of underwriting guidelines so you may not get the same risk class offer from one company as you would from another . Some companies are conservative in their underwriting -LRB- meaning they have stricter underwriting requirements -RRB- and others can be more aggressive -LRB- meaning they have more lenient underwriting -RRB- . For example , company A may offer a given medical history a preferred risk class while company B could easily offer a standard risk class -LRB- requiring much more in premiums for the same coverage -RRB- .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
PPO is not a type of health insurance . It is an abbreviation for Preferred Provider Organization -LRB- PPO -RRB- which describes the network provider contracting approach associated with whatever health insurance plan you are purchasing . PPO network based health insurance products have dominated the marketplace for many years so it is not unusual for the consumer to blend the two . After January 1 , 2014 you will want to have your health insurance agent check for you , or if you are a `` do it yourselfer `` do someresearching online to determine the type of provider network associated with health plans you may be interested in . The traditional features of PPO plan designs have been to have office visit & prescription copayments , lower deductibles , higher co-insurance levels and lower out-of-pocket financial exposure for using in-network PPO providers while still having coverage for voluntary usage of non-network providers at reduced benefit levels . PPO plans are the dominant network arrangement in the current health insurance marketplace . However , changes brought about by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- , are causing insurance carriers to re-design their products and this does extend to the design of their provider networks . This is especially true of the health insurance products sold in the government health insurance marketplaces where the consumer may encounter multiple network or sub-network type provider arrangements in this environment . For instance , here in Tennessee , the BC/BS plan offers essentially the same insurance products with pricing based on your choice of 3 different PPO networks at 3 different price points . The larger the PPO provider network you choose the higher the insurance premium associated with the product . In fact , the smallest of the 3 BC/BS network options is offered only in the government marketplace . So , these are words of caution , there are degrees of difference even within what are technically PPO based products these days . Do n't just assume that a provider is going to be in-network with an insurance carrier based upon your past experience . Verify with both the insurance carrier and the doctor 's office that they are a participating provider . Also , especially in the individual health insurance marketplace starting in 2014 , you will want to be aware of the growing move back to Point-of-Service -LRB- POS -RRB- , Health Maintenance Organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- and Accountable Care Organization -LRB- ACO -RRB- based provider delivery systems associated with a growing number of health insurance products . These other variations on the theme apply more stringent guidelines to provider access in a variety of ways -LRB- reduced network sizes , gate keeper referral arrangements , sharply reduced or no out-of-network coverage -RRB- and introduce entirely new considerations for the consumer .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
That is a great question ! Unlike a whole life policy , which ends when you do , term policies almost always end before you do . It 's why they are so cheaply offered , statistically , the companies rarely have to pay out , compared to whole life policies . So when they do end , you have really only three choices : walk away as if there never was a policy , -LRB- since there is nothing contractually obligating either of you anymore , in the typical policy case -RRB- , hope that the policy has a conversion clause -LRB- one that allows your paid premiums to be converted to a paid up whole life policy with a greatly reduced face value -RRB- , or you renew the policy . If you choose the latter , be prepared for the policy to renew in one year terms , and for the price to go up exponentially each time . They get very expensive very quickly . This can be a real problem if it happens when age or health issues prevent you from finding another company that will write you . This is often the case with the term policies that companies like AARP and AAA offer , policies that end when you turn 80 . With life expectancy now averaging years longer than 80 , and the increasing costs as you age , more and more Elder citizens find themselves out a lot of money , and with no protection . Please be careful when you are looking at these kinds of policies , okay ? Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Raccoon Damage ?
Homeowner policies generally exclude damage arising from '' ... birds , vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . '' A raccoon is not any one of those items , accordingly I would sayraccoon damage iscovered . However the policy language of your policy is the deciding factor . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
Yes , actually it is . Homeowners generally does not cover for damage by rodents . However , raccoons are actually part of the bear family And so there is coverage . It is always a good idea to look over your policy and if you are unclear about something , give your insurance professional A call
Homeowner policies generally exclude damage arising from '' ... birds , vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . '' A raccoon is not any one of those items , accordingly I would sayraccoon damage iscovered . However the policy language of your policy is the deciding factor . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
Damage to a structure from termites , ants and insects in general is not covered under the standard homeowner insurance policy . The underlying theory is that such damage is the result of infestation due to negligence on the part of the homeowner as the proximate cause of the occurrence . The homeowner is obligated to inspect for such damage and remedy the situation accordingly . Homeowner insurance covers structural damage that is sudden and accidental in nature . Infestation does not fit these criteria . Check with a qualified -LRB- recommended -RRB- and fully licensed pest control operation in your area . You may be able to purchase a policy or bond that would cover you for certain types of infestation after they have inspected and possibly treated your residence structure . We are talking about structural damages here . There could be coverage for damages that might occur from a roof collapse , for example , resulting from the infestation , that causes loss to other property within the dwelling . However , the infestation damage itself is not covered .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
It depends upon the source of the water damage , the type of policy you have and whether the house is abandoned . To make this answer easier , lets assume that you have a Homeowners 3 policy and the house is either occupied or vacant -LRB- some furniture and presence -RRB- . Water damage from a burst pipe : typically your homeowners insurance will water damage from a burst pipe , however it will not cover the damaged pipe . You can get an endorsement to cover the damaged pipes . Water damage from rain/hail/wind : this will only be covered on a basic homeowners policy if the rain/hail caused the hole in the roof that lead to the water damage in your bathroom . Once again , you can get an endorsement to cover rain/hail/wind damage . Water damage from sewer backup or sump-pump failure : if the bathroom is in the basement and the water damage if from sewer backup or sump-pump failure you can only get coverage for this IF you have the appropriate endorsement - sewer and water backup . Please note that this is typically a sub-limit in your policy and goes towards both cleanup and replacement . I hope this helps .
-- > Normal 0 While I have no intention to question a colleague , Im not sure I would place a Travelers Tenants policy in the Excellent column , good , maybe , but certainly not excellent . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy covers your personal property but limits that coverage to specific named perils . In my opinion , an excellent tenant homeowners policy would cover any direct damage -LRB- except for specific exclusions and limitations -RRB- . The basic Travelers tenants policy covers the insured for the Actual Cash Value of their property . An excellent policy would cover the full replacement cost of covered property , new for old . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy , like many others , covers your personal property but limits theft coverage on Jewelry , Furs or Silver to , I believe , $ 1000 . An excellent policy would have either no limitations or the limits would be no less than $ 5000 in the aggregate for each category . The Travelers liability coverage excludes , as do most other tenants policies , property damage to property in the insureds care , custody or control . Generally that would include property damage to the apartment you are living in . This exclusion would not apply to Fire or Smoke damage but I dont believe water damage to the apartment you rent would be covered by the basic policy . Securing coverage for accidental damage to the apartment they are living in may be a very important coverage for most apartment renters . Obtaining a waiver from your landlord for any damage covered by the landlords insurance may be the best and most economical alternative . If buying coverage on-line or face to face from a local broker , I suggest these questions be raised and addressed .
Most homeowners insurance policies provide some coverage for loss assessments due to a covered loss . If your homeowners association community charges you an assessment for damage that would be covered by homeowners insurance then you can submit a claim for reimbursement . For example , a community here in Richmond , Virgina recently assessed all homeowners $ 3,000 for damage to the pool house due to a fallen tree . My client 's home policy provided loss assessment coverage up to $ 5,000 and since this type of loss is covered on his homeowners insurance he was fully reimbursed less his deductible . Loss assessment coverage does NOT reimburse homeowners for maintenance fees . If your association board votes to paint a build or do any kind of maintenance work this cost is not covered .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
To answer this question , I will assume that it is posed to determine if a homeowner policy will cover any type of damage to an air conditioner , absent any other facts . The homeowner policy is definitely not a maintenance policy and therefore will not pay for damage to the unit , unless it is damaged by the occurrence of some other type of covered peril . For example , if it is a relatively expensive ` window unit ' and a heavy picture falls off of the wall , striking and severely damaging the ac unit , there could be coverage , subject to the application of the homeowner policy deductible . In reality , you should think twice about the future premium increase ramifications of submitting a smallish claim of this nature . You would , in a situation of this nature , check with your agent to make sure it is worth submitting . If it is a central ac unit and is damaged by a fire in the garage caused by a carelessly laid cigar , there would be coverage , again subject to the deductible . The financial loss for a central ac unit would no doubt be much more extensive that for a window unit and might therefore merit claim submission . Also , the fire described would probably have damaged the walls , ceiling , possibly stored objects , etc. , and produced smoke damage to other parts of a house , if attached , justifying submission of a broader claim for damages , including those to the ac unit .
It 's the homeowner 's responsibility to remove dead or damaged trees before they fall . Homeowners insurance will not cover dead or damaged trees . Homeowners insurance will cover resulting damage and the cost to cut up the tree if the trees falls on covered property . If a tree falls over but does not hit covered property , there is no coverage . If your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , your neighbor is only responsible for the portion of the tree located on his property . The portion of the tree on your property is your responsibility even though it 's not your tree .
-- > Normal 0 All homeowners policies will cover your home and personal property should it be damaged but the type of damage you are covered for is defined in two general types of insuring agreements . One type -LRB- Named Peril -RRB- will tell you what specific types of damage you are covered for . The policies will actually name them ; fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , vandalism , etc. . For damage to be covered , you have to prove to the insurance company that the damage you sustained was caused by one of these named perils . The second type of insuring agreement -LRB- often referred to as all-risk -RRB- covers you for any direct damage unless the policy specifically excludes or limits it . Under this form of insurance , any damage is covered unless the insurance company can prove a specific exclusion or limitation applies . The burden of proof shifts from you proving you are covered under a Named Peril policy to the insurance company proving you are not covered under an All-Risk type policy . A small difference which means a lot should you have a claim . The term all-risk isnt used too much anymore ; this type of policy is often referred to as Special Form or Open Peril policies . Whatever you want to call them , this is the type of insuring agreement you should look for . Most of us are not prepared to prove anything to an insurance company . Its also much easier to understand what you are not covered for simply by reading the exclusions and limitations .
Home insurance covers damages . An all risk homeowners policy covers many perils , however it specifically excludes some . Among these exclusions in most policies is earth movement and intrusion of water from outside the residence . Homeowners insurance does not cover wear and tear to any component of the house , including the drainage . For example , if a drainage pipe were damaged in a fire , it would be covered . If the same pipe failed , it probably would not be covered . Incidentally the damage caused by the failed drainage pipe might be covered .
If a fallen tree , whether your own or your neighbors , has landed in your yard , on car or on your home , you are likely wondering whether your current homeowners insurance policy will cover the repair costs . Damage to your home and its contents , regardless of whether the trees origin was from your own property or a neighboring , is covered under a homeowners policy . For property such as sheds , additions or detached garages , there is generally a maximum amount of coverage offered for fallen tree damage -LRB- i.e. 10 % of your entire propertys value -RRB- . Even though your homeowners insurance policy will cover damage resulting from fallen trees , it is important to keep in mind that you are financially responsible for any applicable policy deductible . For example , if your homeowners insurance policy has a $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 deductible and the total cost of repairs is $ 25,000 , you will be required to pay either $ 5,000 or $ 10,000 out of pocket for the clean-up to be completed . If the fallen tree was from your neighbors yard , it is possible that your insurance company will attempt to get their policy to cover the cost of the damage . In this event , you may be refunded any deductible you paid for the repairs .
Renters Insurance , or what I would refer to as a Tenant-homeowner 's policy , would cover any personal property you own except that which is specifically listed as `` Property not covered '' . Some of the specific types of property not covered include autos , aircraft , animals , birds and fish . Since cell phones are not on that list , they would be covered property . Specific limits apply to certain types of property , money , theft of jewelry or silver , etc. . Cell phones are not on that list either . While a cell phone may be `` covered property '' , the damage it sustains must be caused by one of the covered perils . The perils are listed and include fire , lightning , wind , hail , theft , vehicle damage , etc. . You will note water damage is not a covered peril , nor is dropping the phone or breaking the screen . These policies have , in addition , a number of exclusions including earthquake , flood , intentional damage , etc. . So cell phones would be covered as long as they were damaged by a covered peril and the damage exceeded the deductible which is commonly $ 250 or more . If you meet all those tests , the basic policy would then reimburse you for the actual value of the phone , not what it costs to replace it . Optional replacement cost coverage is generally available , if you have it the cost of a new phone would be the basis for your claim . Then the question will be what is the value of the phone ? Is it the actual phone or the two year service agreement you have committed yourself to ? Bottom line , I would n't depend on Renter 's Insurance to cover damage to my cell phone . It seems to me one of those non-catastrophic risks you may be better off assuming .
Your homeowners insurance may cover the removal of mold . It depends why there is mold in the first place as to whether they 'll cover it . If they do cover the removal of the mold , they will , most likely , have a limit on the damage . For coverage to be triggered for almost anything there must be a sudden and accidental occurrence that can be pinpointed : Roof damage from wind that let water into the house a burst water pipe or broken water heater There must be a covered cause for why the water entered the home . Only then will your company cover any resulting mold damage . Notice that I said `` resulting '' . Mold damage that appears because of seepage or some other maintenance issue will not be covered . Most companies now limit the amount of money they will spend to clean up mold damage . This will be explicitly stated in your policy and you should be aware of what that limit is . So , once again , there must be a covered cause for the resulting mold damage and there will usually be a limit for how much damage they 'll cover . be smart , read your policy and , above all , find an agent you can trust .
Insurance covers specified perils . Water damage is the result of an event . Everything depends upon what caused the water damage . If the damage is caused by the sudden rupture of water pipes inside the home , the damage is covered by most homeowners policies . If the damage is caused by the overflow of a toilet , the loss would be excluded by most homeowners policies . Incidentally , many insurance companies will provide coverage for the overflowing of a toilet if an extension to coverage is purchased at an increased premium . If the loss is caused by water enter the house from outside it is most likely not going to be covered . Flood insurance , an additional insurance policy is required to cover this type of loss . While it is true that flood damage is not always clear cut , it is important to note that almost one quarter of all property claims involve flood damage in the United States . The purchase of a flood policy is a wise move regardless of where you are located . I have seen desert towns inundated as well as mountain communities . In some places flooding is common .
end question
start question
annuities
What Does Annuity Due Mean ?
The word , annuity probably dates back to Rome . The annua was an annual payment . There were some arrangements where the payment lasted the lifetime of the recipient . Tables for these payments were developed during the Roman Empire and used to compensate soldiers for their service . They received a life time of annual payments .
Most annuities are ordinary annuities - the payment -LRB- income payment -RRB- is paid at the end of the period . For example you invest in an income annuity today and one month later your monthly income starts . An annuity due requires payment at the beginning of the period . If you have further questions , you can contact me through this website or www.jpw.ca
That is a great question ! The definition of an annuity is '' any stream of payments that has a fixed total . '' When we use the word in our financial word , we are referring to an investment vehicle designed for providing a long lasting income stream . They are offered by insurance companies and other financial institutions , and are used to fund retirements , grants and trusts . Here 's a very simple description of how an annuity works : They are funded by a deposit , which then sits for a number of years gathering interest . After that period of time , the annuity begins paying out a set amount until either it runs out , the owner dies , or the owners spouse dies , depending upon how the annuity is structured . It guarantees that there will be an income that lasts as long as you do . Because they require that the deposit sit untouched for many years , an annuity may not be a good investment for some people . That deposit money can be taken out , but there are very costly penalties . As a result , regulations require that the seller sit down with you first and do what is called a `` suitability study . '' They will go over your financial situation , your retirement plans , and your goals . If it is found to not be `` suitable '' for you , they can not sell you one . This protects folks that may have need for that cash from being trapped into a losing investment . I hope that answers your question for you , if you 'd like more detail , I 'd be happy to help , feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Enhanced annuities are generally immediate , lifetime income annuities that pay more in the payout period due to the health factors of the annuitant -LRB- person upon whose life annuity payments are based -RRB- . Lifetime annuities pay out until the annuitant dies -LRB- plus any guarantees built into the contract -RRB- . Annuity payments are based on actuarial tables . If the person receiving the payments lives longer than expected , it is to their advantage . Enhanced annuities or Impaired annuities pay extra because the annuitant has a shorter life expectancy . This can be due to health conditions or health habits such as smoking .
When you are looking at starting an annuity there are two types of money that can be used . There is qualified , money that you have n't paid taxes on like a 401k that was funded with pre-tax dollars . When you start taking distributions from an annuity funded with qualified money , you will have to pay takes on the principal and the interest that was earned . With non-qualified money , money that you already paid taxes on like money from a saving or checking account , when you start taking distribution you will only pay taxed on the interest that was earned . Now there are also two different types of annuities deferred and immediate . A deferred means that there is a waited period before you can start taking distributions or immediate meaning that once that annuity is in affect you can immediately start taking distributions . So a non qualified immediate annuity means that the money being used to fund it has already been taxed and once the annuity is approved you can immediately start taking an income . When looking at annuities make sure that you shop around with a broker that represent multiple annuities . You may want to look at some that offer an income bonus and or a life time income .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
In finance , ordinary annuity is a reference to the timing of the payment coming from the annuity . An ordinary annuity pays at the end of the period . The alternative to this is an annuity due . In the case of an annuity due , the payment from the annuity occurs at the beginning of the period .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
Life insurance that is guaranteed issue means that the person applying for it can not be declined due to life insurance or other risk . However , there are usually strict age guidelines for guaranteed issue life insurance , with the minimum age usually age 40-50 and the maximum age usually under age 80 . Also , the policy is graded during the first one to three years , meaning that it will pay a portion of the death benefit -LRB- or pay back what was paid in plus a little extra -RRB- during those years for death due to natural causes . After the graded period is over , it generally pays 100 % for death by any reason .
A deferred Annuity means your Taxes are not payed until you start taking money out of the account , tax-deferral . All Annuities have this tax deferral so it does not matter what kind of Annuity you get . An annuity is a contract between you and an insurance company . The annuity will credit money to your account according to the method which comes with the Annuity . There is so much more you need to know about annuities before you get one so please follow up with your Broker or contact me if you do not have one .
Annuities work by the insurance company taking your premium in a lump sum or series of payments , investing it , and crediting you with a fixed and/or variable interest rate during what is called the accumulation period . The insurance company then pays the premium and interest back out to you in payment installments during what is called the annuity period . These annuity payments to you can be for a set period of time or for life . Annuities do not have medical requirements , are flexible due to having many options in how they are structured , and the growth in an annuity is generally tax deferred until it is payed out during the annuity period .
There are issue age limits to most annuities , generally age 85 , some to age 90 . There 's an old adage : just because you can do something does n't mean you should . Annuities for age 80 and over should be scrutinized by the policy estate beneficiaries or adviser for geriatric product suitability . That does ' t mean you ca n't should n't own an annuity post age 80 , just that it must make economic sense in light of the annuitant 's life expectancy .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
I 'm going to keep this simple and generic as we can spend a lot of time reviewing this question . First , what is an annuity ? An annuity is simply a contract between you and an insurance company where they offer market like gains or guaranteed gains like in a CD over a length of time , usually anywhere from 3 to 15 years . A fixed annuity simply means the money is not invested in the market although growth may be tied to gains but you will not get 100 % of gain but you also will not see the losses either due to the downside guarantees . A variable annuity invests money in the market with all the risks associated to market investing . There usually are death benefit guarantees where if you die before taking money out , the initial amount of premium is returned to your heirs . Please contact a registered representative to get more details and a prospectus .
Most people consider purchasing renter 's insurance to cover their personal belongings - most renter 's policies will pay for the loss of personal property due to theft , vandalism , fire , etc. . However , a renter 's policy can also provide coverage if you are personally liable for injury to another person or damage to their property due to a non-vehicle related incident . In addition , a renter 's policy may also pay for `` loss of use '' due to a covered loss , meaning if you are forced to temporarily relocate due to said loss , there may be coverage for related expenses . Renter 's insurance is typically very affordable . Premiums can vary from one person to another , and some companies may offer better prices than others depending on your location , but I 've seen renter 's policies as low as $ 9 or $ 10/month . Please bear in mind that there are a lot of variables that affect your rate , and you may or may not be able to find renter 's insurance for this kind of price .
How are annuity gains taxed ? Well , depending on how you funded the annuity and how you choose to distribute from the annuity the answer and be part of the distribution to all of the distribution . If you use qualified money to fund your annuity , you 've skipped paying taxes on those funds . This means when you have the funds distributed the entire amount is taxable . If you paid taxes on the money used to fund the annuity , you only pay taxes on the gains liquidated . The distribution is basically split in half for tax purposes . One thing as you consider distribution from your annuity . . only the money actually taken out is taxed , so taking funds out on a regular basis means you only pay taxes on what comes out of the policy .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does The Bible Say About Life Insurance ?
I am certainly not a scholar and can say I do not know the bible like I should however I can safely say the bible does not talk about Life Insurance by that name . There are many versus and scriptures however that talk about managing your money , staying out of debt , lending money , etc. . . There is nothing wrong with taking care of loved ones or your obligations to cover your expenses when you pass away . There are ways you can have to benefit paid out as to prevent or at least minimize what I refer to as the `` lottery syndrome '' which is someone receiving a large sum of monies when they have not earned them . There is no respect for that money and therefor will and has been spent unwisely . If you need more information , I can refer some books for you to read which draw upon scripture and managing your monies .
Life insurance was not in existence at the time the Bible was written , but there are verses that could relate to the concept of life insurance . Prov . 13:22 a `` A good man leaves an inheritance to his children 's children . . '' 1 Tim 5:8 `` But if anyone does not provide for his relatives , and especially for the members of his household , he has denied the faith ... '' Life insurance is a financial vehicle , as are savings accounts , money markets , stock markets , etc. . The Bible has a lot to say about money ; it is up to you and God to determine what is right for you .
I am certainly not a scholar and can say I do not know the bible like I should however I can safely say the bible does not talk about Life Insurance by that name . There are many versus and scriptures however that talk about managing your money , staying out of debt , lending money , etc. . . There is nothing wrong with taking care of loved ones or your obligations to cover your expenses when you pass away . There are ways you can have to benefit paid out as to prevent or at least minimize what I refer to as the `` lottery syndrome '' which is someone receiving a large sum of monies when they have not earned them . There is no respect for that money and therefor will and has been spent unwisely . If you need more information , I can refer some books for you to read which draw upon scripture and managing your monies .
Life insurance was not in existence at the time the Bible was written , but there are verses that could relate to the concept of life insurance . Prov . 13:22 a `` A good man leaves an inheritance to his children 's children . . '' 1 Tim 5:8 `` But if anyone does not provide for his relatives , and especially for the members of his household , he has denied the faith ... '' Life insurance is a financial vehicle , as are savings accounts , money markets , stock markets , etc. . The Bible has a lot to say about money ; it is up to you and God to determine what is right for you .
Being a health insurance broker is a extreamly difficult undertaking . The two markets that you will want to consider are the individual and the group markets . It is far more difficult to learn the group market because of the many IRC and federal regulations that come into play . There is no one path to becoming a knowledgable and trusted broker although I do recomend that anyone atempting to undertake such a career put in many months of intense study . Continuing education courses are great sources for indepth information about different aspects of the health insurance world such as HSA 's , FSA 's , systems of managed care , HDHP 's , self-funding , regulatory considerations , etc. . . Another wonderful resource that I view as manditory reading for anyone interested in brokering any employee benefts would be `` The Handbook of Employee Benefits '' by Jerry S. Rosenbloom , it is as close to a brokers bible as I have found . I would be happy to discuss this in more detail if you like ... Feel free to email me or give me a call sometime , - Christopher Lawrence 609-453-4359 Christopher@Lawrence-Financial-Consulting.com
Shockingly , a type of annuity was discovered in Egypt in 1700 BC . In 562 BC there is a passage in the Bible referring to a form of annuity . By the second century Roman soldiers were given a life annuity for service to the empire . For the next millennium , churches and monasteries used life annuities . In 1693 , Sir Edmund Halley , created the first mortality tables based on age for life annuities , the basic acturial science we use today . Nothings new under the sun .
That is a great question ! The deal is that it really boils down to how well you manage your money , in my opinion . The sales pitch for a flexible premium policy is that you have the ability to be `` flexible '' with your payments - you might pay a little more than the premium , skip a payment entirely , or overpay , as you see fit . If you are the type of person that is very closely watching your expenditures , and keeps a sharp eye on your investments , then this policy type can be potentially helpful in the convenience it offers . But ... If you are like the overwhelming majority of Americans -LRB- 77 % - an unbelievable 77 % !! -RRB- that live paycheck to paycheck , part of the 66 % without adequate -LRB- or any -RRB- savings , or the 35 % with a bill currently in collections , this may not be a good thing . The Bible tells us that while `` All things are permissible , not all things are good . '' That is solid wisdom , in this case . The temptation here is to believe that the `` flexibility '' offered here provides you with more wiggle room in payments . While that is true to some degree , the truth is that there is a bottom line cost that has to be regularly covered or the policy goes under and lapses . Once it does , everything that you 've paid into it goes under also . Sadly , what happens to those who have problems with cash flow and/or money management is that they make payments that cover those costs for a while , but slowly start underpaying or skipping payments , and the result is that the minimum premium payment goes up , it becomes unaffordable , more payments are underpaid or missed , and the policy goes down like the Titanic , taking all your money with it . So it is generally my opinion and recommendation that having a single , set premium payment policy is generally a safer bet . If the payment is budgeted for , and prioritized , there is far less chance of the policy falling behind and lapsing . The offer of flexible payments is definitely tantalizing , but then again , most of the things that are bad for us generally are ... Bottom line ? If you are good with your money and keep an eye on your financial matters , there are times when having that flexibility can be helpful . If you feel that money management may be an area of opportunity for you , perhaps the stability of the fixed premium policy would be a safer choice . I hope that helps , if you have any questions , please do not hesitate to inbox me , okay ? Thank you very much for asking !
Risk and Return possibilities . Or visa versa . What I will do is list my thoughts on Variable life and you can decide if it 's a pro or a con to having a VUL . Requires consistent steady review by insured . Requires rebalancing over time . Requires the insured to make investment choices and live with the results . Requires the insured to have financial knowledge about mutual funds . Requires the insured to have an understanding of financial risk . So depending about how you feel about the requirements as they can be either pro or con , depending on the individual , should determine how you feel about a VUL as a choice . While it is easy to reference `` potential for greater returns '' that does n't say anything about how to get greater returns , those requirements listed put you on track for greater returns , but that said , it does n't guarantee greater returns .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
Is Northwestern Mutual whole Life a good investment ? Well it depends on your needs . Your needs are what make any choice a good or bad investment . First Northwestern Mutual is a very highly rated fiscally strong company , as many others are . Using Whole life as an investment does work as part of an overall investment strategy as it provides a safe place to accumulate money as well as protecting your other plans . What you will find is whole life insurance is the most boring investment product out there . It 's not exciting , it 's not racy , it 's not an up and down product . It is a slow safe and secure place to put money out there . It 's boring because it does what it says it will do . I have owned whole life for almost 30 years and it has never let me down . Ca n't say the same about my real estate or stock market investments during that same window of time . Oh , last thing to keep it short . Whole life cash values do n't go backwards . You ca n't lose it once it 's there .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How many life insurance policies can I have ? '' Well , actually you can have as many as you want as long as the death benefit does n't exceed the justification issue , which is the companies will say , `` We think that your exposure on your life is worth , '' let 's say a million dollars . So if you have four or five policies and they total up to a million and as long as it did not exceed what they call financial justification you can multiple policies and many people do . But remember , the total amount of insurance on all these policies are going to be shown on the application . And so when you take the total , as long as it does n't exceed what they believe is your economic justification , it does n't exceed it , you 'll be able to get as much insurance as you want up to that limit .
I love Dave Ramsey . I listen to him and have attended his financial peace university and let me tell you , great advise . I even have his book sitting on my desk as I type this . However I can not speak on behalf Dave Ramsey but if I recall correctly Dave would say do n't spend your money on a fancy car but instead build your wealth first . Dave 's saying is `` Live like no one else so later you can live like non one else '' . Also he would say carry high liability limits to protect your assets and the highest deductibles you can afford unless a higher deductible does not make a significant enough premium difference . I would recommend hisfinancialpeace series and book and then I would go ask Dave what he thinks about auto insurance .
New York Life provides options for exactly this situation . Say you do not want to pay premiums the rest of your life . Or say you want to give a gift to your grandchildren . This is exactly why New York Life , America 's oldest , largest , and highest rated life insurance company , created Custom Whole Life . With New York Life 's Custom Whole Life , you can arrange to pay premiums for a fixed number of years , to continue your policy , or the policy of whomever you are gifting it to , say your grandchildren . After that fixed number of year , the entire Life Insurance Policy will have been paid in full , and paid with a reduced amount of premium dollars ! How does New York Life do this ? The sooner they have the money , the quicker it can be invested by New York Life , building growth and compounding the interest . Yes , the premium for those first few years will be higher than under regular whole life , but it will quickly disappear completely and the policy will be paid in fully , requiring no further premium payments ever from anyone ! This sounds like exactly what you are looking for .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
Video Transcript : Which life insurance company is the best ? I do n't know if I can say that , because remember , they all have different fortes . Some are great underwriting companies , some are great death benefit ; cheap premium companies . Some companies are really good about supplemental income ; their cash values are really good and they have a good track record of accumulating wealth . You want to look at ` what is the reason ? What is the area ? ' Each area has their own forte . Some people want highly-rated carriers , so you 're going to look at the big financial strength of a carrier or the carrier 's claims - paying ability . Any of those areas are separate areas of discussion and that 's why it 's difficult to ever say , `` Here 's one , or here 's the best . '' If I 'm looking for price tag , underwriting , cash value accumulation , or just cheap premium just to pay my premium off to cover my liability , it depends upon what category you 're in so I can be able to say , `` Is that the best company ? ''
Minors can certainly be named as a beneficiary to an insurance policy . But what you want to consider is what the purpose of the insurance is . If you want the insurance to cover your final and burial expenses then you may not want to name a minor because he or she will not have access to the money until age 18 or 21 depending on where you live . If the purpose is to leave a legacy for the minor , the best thing to do is create a living trust . Name the trust as the beneficiary and earmark those funds for the minor . A living trust is very flexible . You can basically say when and for what reason the minor can have access to the funds . You can say that money can be paid for the minors private education ; you can say the minor gets 25 % at age 21 , etc. . And the best part is whatever you have specified ca n't be changed after your passing AND the trust does not go through probate . So , there is no court intervention or delays .
I always say yes because it 's a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about . The way I look at disability insurance is it protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the coverage is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the MOST favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the worst definition as you must meet more requirements than a true own occupation or modified own occupation to receive a benefit payout . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . If you have disability insurance with the gainful occupation definition , I would suggest replacing it immediately with a true own occupation or modified own occupation policy or at the very least supplement it with a policy that features a stronger definition -LRB- I would highly recommend one with the true own occupation definition -RRB- . If you 're going to buy/have disability insurance , it 's not something you want to be cheap about . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own . This is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Why is whole life a bad investment ? Well , it could be the people that tell you that whole life is a bad investment do n't sell whole life and want you to purchase what they have for you to buy . Or quite often whole life is compared to term with a equity -LRB- stock -RRB- fund . The problem with this as an accurate comparison is that it does n't take risk into account . Whole life is a dull boring consistent product that does what it says it will over time . A stock market equity -LRB- mutual fund or whatever -RRB- is a different sort of risk . It can rise and fall and even disappear . While whole life policies tend to be invested in more secure long term investments which because they 're safe and long term , provide a lower , but consistent rate of return . And the nice thing about Whole life is the cash values ca n't go backwards .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Do You Need Home Insurance Before Closing ?
If you have a mortgage on the home you are purchasing , you would need to have homeowner 's insurance in place before you close . Typically , an annual premium is required so that you meet the requirements of the lender . A declarations page with the stated coverages on your home will be provided to you by the insurer or broker so you can close .
How much home insurance do you want ? Do you want a policy for a home loan closing that meets the lender 's miniumum requirements ? Do you want to insure a home for what its market value is ? Do you want to insure your home for what it will cost to rebuild it and the necessary costs for debris removal , architectural fees , permits , building code upgrades ? The bottom line is that a homeowners policy produced for a mortgage closing is a minor detail but a homeowners policy when your home is damaged is EVERYTHING . A conversation with an insurance professional will cover these topics relative to your wants to determine just how much coverage you need .
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
If you have a mortgage on the home you are purchasing , you would need to have homeowner 's insurance in place before you close . Typically , an annual premium is required so that you meet the requirements of the lender . A declarations page with the stated coverages on your home will be provided to you by the insurer or broker so you can close .
To issue a homeowners policy , the company will need a great deal of information . They will need information about the fire protection where the home is located . They will need to know the size and construction of the home . They want to know how close the home is to a body of water . They will need to know what pets are on the property . They will need to know the condition of the home , in particular , the roof . Most insurers require photographs of the home .
If the premium for a homeowners policy is in an escrow closing that will be noted in the papers you sign . If you are responsible to provide the insurance , outside of the closing , the lender will normally require evidence of insurance at or before closing . This can create difficulties when you refinance in the middle of the year and move from a loan with an escrow account to one without an escrow account . If you fail to notify the insurance company the premium notice goes to the wrong place and it can lead to a policy lapse which is a major headache !!
You will need to show proof that you have Homeowners Insurance on the home you are purchasing at the very least , at the time of closing . Here in CT , however , most banks and mortgage companies are requiring that the proof be provided to them several days before . What you will need to provide is a copy of the policy declaration sheet showing your name as it will appear on the deed and closing documents andall the necessary coverage on the dwelling which usually needs to also stipulate that you are covered for `` Replacement Value '' . The mortgagee clause , which is very specific to each lender also needs to appear on the declaration . If they have assigned a loan number , that should be included as well . Finally , here in CT , whether you are going to be paying your insurance directly or if it will be paid by an escrow account , your lender will also be requiring a paid receipt for the first year 's premium . Talk to your insurance professional early in the process , usually after your offer has been approved , so that you are sure that everything will be handled in a timely and professional manner for you .
You should have home insurance in place at the time you close on the loan or the closing of the home . Once your name is on the deed you are responsible for everything that happens to that property . For example if you have a $ 100,000 loan for the property and it burns to the ground you would be liable for the loan even if you had no insurance . If someone comes to your home and falls down the stairs and has a $ 2000 emergency room claim , you are responsible . You should contact a broker like myself and get some quotes and coverage . Please visit WEBSITELINK
There are many factors that affect the rates for homeowners insurance : Homeowner -LRB- insured -RRB- - The insured 's age , credit rating , loss experience , prior coveragewill affect the premium charged for a homeowners policy . Home location - Location is a very big deal . For example , a home located on the coast will be subject to a much higher premium compared to the same home located far inland due to the increased possibility of loss from wind or storm damage . Likewise , a home located in an area that has excellent fire protection -LRB- very close proximity to a fire station -RRB- will have a lower premium than the same home located in a secluded location very far away from fire protection . Home Construction - A stick-built wood frame home is more expensive to insure than the same valued home constructed of fire-resistive materials due to the increased potential for catastrophic fire loss with the former . Coverage Limits - Obviously a $ 500,000 home will cost more to insure than a similarly located/constructed $ 200,000 home .
What kind of retirement plan is a PSERS ? While not familiar with the letters as they may be different in my state , I will assume you are asking about PERS ? PERS is short for the Public Employees Retirement System . It is the pension plan in my state for our public school teachers and has several versions . The first PERS1 was created in 1947 and closed in 1977 . The second PERSII was created in 1977 and closed around 2000 . PERS III is currently in effect and may close in the next few years as legislature moves to reduce their liability to employees for retirement . When these plans close , they do not end , they just stop taking new participants . The state does not lose their obligation to employees and retirees in these plans .
If you are buying your first home , then I would recommend considering it part of your closing costs , yes . Lenders will require you to show proof that you have obtained Home Insurance sufficiently covering the reconstruction value of your new home . They will be looking to see that it provides for replacement value should there be a loss . So , because you will have to buy that first , and will more than likely have to pay the first year 's premium in full , I would plan on that as you would any other closing costs .
Great Question . First of all if you have a current home insurance claim right now open I hope you are doing okay and hope it will resolve soon . A claim is hard to say on the time it takes to close the claim . It depends on the severity of the claim and if its home claim or Condo claim . But typically the insurance company would like to close most claims in 30 days or less .
Normally , insurance agents do not write title insurance . This is a specialty product that is written by licensed agents inside title companies . The price is not common knowledge however ; it is disclosed during the closing for a home . I dont believe that you have an option over the price . You do have an option over which Title Company will handle the closing . You might check with a realtor to determine if there is any difference in the price of their insurance and other services .
Start by talking to your Insurance Professional . When you are buying a new home , there will be certain requirements that must be met in order to prepare to close on this important purchase . One of these is to be able to show proof of Homeowners coverage beginning at least on the date of the closing . Tell your insurance professional the address of the house and any particular pieces of information needed in order for him or her to complete a quality `` Reconstruction Analysis '' of the house . The results of this will become the recommended dwelling amount . You will be able to decide on the amount of Liability coverage as well as the property deductible , each of which will help to determine the final price of the coverage . Once agreed upon , the application will be produced and available for your signature . Most banks and Mortgage Companies in Connecticut will require that the first year 's total premium be paid in full and then an escrow account will be set up to handle your renewal payments . You will need to provide both a copy of the policy binder or declaration sheet along with a receipt showing the full year 's premium has been paid . Best of luck with your new home !
The best way to get a close guess to what they will pay for your car is to run a value of your car prior to the damage . Many use the nada.com or Kelly blue book both are online . This will give you a close price to what they will give you . Also you can contact most car dealerships and ask them the value of your car before it was wrecked .
If your home is financed or if you are obtaining a mortgage - most mortgagees require homeowners insurance at the time of closing . You will be asked to provide a copy of a paid receipt and declarations page to satisfy your loan requirements . If you are escrowing and your mortgagee is paying for your insurance , you would need to give a copy of a binder of insurance with a balance due/invoice for them to pay your insurance at closing .
That is a great question ! I 'd need to know a little more information about why you want to withdraw or close it out , before I 'd feel comfortable telling you to do it . There are very large penalties for early withdrawals from your 401k , and if you are counting on a certain amount , unless you are in your 60 's , please count on that amount being reduced by about a third , after taxes and penalties . 401k money looks good , but taking it out for something other than its intended use is costly . If you would like to proceed anyway , contact your plan administrator , and they will give you the forms to fill out . I can not say strongly enough to speak with an advisor before doing this , for any reason other than starting your retirement income . Thank you for asking !
Home insurance is not something to take for granted . Unfortunately , most people do because it 's the last thing they need to close on a house . There are several variables that come into play with Home insurance and selecting the cheapest policy can cost you thousands down the road . The best way to select home insurance is to work with an independent agent . Independent agents are not held to any one company . They can review several different plans and compare rates to make sure you are getting the best policy based on your needs , not the insurance company .
There is a great deal of public information available on the internet about most homes in most locations . At a minimum we would need to know the address of the property . To prepare a quote we would need to know your general description of the home and determine if there were any pets , or trampolines on the property . We would need to know if there were any wood-burning devices inside the home . We would need to know if there had been any claims in the past three years on the property or by the proposed insured . The quote we could give you would not be a guaranteed price as that is done after full underwriting takes place but it is usually quite close .
If you are buying a house , and if you are obtaining mortgage financing to do so , either your Mortgage Broker or your Attorney will provide you with a list of required items that the bank will need in order to schedule your closing . One of the primary items on that list will be a requirement to show proof of insurance on your home beginning at least the date of the closing . More than likely you will also be required to show proof that you have paid the first year 's premium for the insurance in full . The best advice is to contact your Insurance Professional about the property purchase as soon as you can after having your offer accepted by the seller . It is never a good idea to wait until the last minute .
end question
start question
annuities
Who May A Single Premium Immediate Annuity Be Appropriate For ?
A single premium immediate annuity may be appropriate for someone who has an adequate amount of savings for retirement , but who wants to supplement their income . Anyone who has a lump sum of money which they do not need access to , and who would like to have it structured to provide additional income on a regular basis , couple possibly benefit from a single premium immediate annuity .
A single premium immediate annuity may be appropriate for someone who has an adequate amount of savings for retirement , but who wants to supplement their income . Anyone who has a lump sum of money which they do not need access to , and who would like to have it structured to provide additional income on a regular basis , couple possibly benefit from a single premium immediate annuity .
The different kinds of annuities have not just one , but a variety of features that make them different . Here are some of them . Keep in mind that each annuity will have a combination of these differing features . 1 -RRB- Immediate vs Deferred . Immediate annuities are often single premium annuities and they begin making payments to the beneficiary almost immediately . Deferred annuities are often paid periodically , although they can also be paid in a single premium . Deferred annuities are not annuitized until after an extended accumulation period . 2 -RRB- Single Premium or Multiple Premium . 3 -RRB- Fixed , Indexed , or Variable . Fixed annuities have a guaranteed minimum interest rate that is paid on the premium paid for the annuity . Indexed annuities have a base interest rate but can perform above that through the use of market indexes . Variable annuities are invested in the stock or other markets and may or may not have guarantees .
A `` single-premium immediate annuity -LRB- SPIA -RRB- '' is an annuity . That is to say , an annuity is defined as an income stream that continues until the annuitant dies when a person pays a lump sum of money -LRB- single premium -RRB- to an insurance company in exchange for that income stream -LRB- annuity -RRB- . So , the term `` single-premium immediate annuity '' is a bit redundant . Think of it as taking retirement money from a privately funded pension , except that , in this case , you are funding it with a one-time , lump-sum of money.The important thing to remember is that once you pay the single premium , that money is essentially `` gone '' . You have just `` purchased '' an income that you can not outlive.There are all sorts of ways to design the annuity -LRB- stream of income -RRB- . You can get a monthly check , quarterly check , annual check - just about any payment schedule you can think of . You can also have the annuity pay out completely should you die before the original single premium you gave to the insurance company gets paid out . Should you choose that option , you will need to name a `` beneficiary '' to receive the remainder of the payout.Annuities , in general , are complex insurance contracts and space is not provided here to go into all the details . But , be absolutely certain that an annuity is right for you before you fork over the money because once it is committed to the contract , you either ca n't get a refund or there are stiff surrender penalties associated with backing out of the deal . Work only with an experienced insurance professional that has a solid working knowledge of what annuities are , how they work , and whether or not it is in your best interest to own one . More advanced knowledge about annuities can be obtained by consumer-friendly websites online .
That is a great question ! There are two basic types of annuities , immediate and deferred . An immediate annuity is one that is made with a single lump sum deposit , and the annuity begins paying out no later than a year from the contract date . A deferred annuity is a contract that may allow periodic payments , or a single payment to fund it ; and the payments do not start for a specified number of years later . It will have a number of fees and penalties attached to the early withdrawal of the funds . A deferred annuity will generally provide a much larger return on your investment because of the time between funding and annuitization , something not provided in the immediate annuity . An immediate annuity would be something to consider if you received a settlement , or large inheritance , and needed to supplement your income , and lower your tax liability . A deferred annuity would be suited for creating an income stream for later in life , understanding that once it was funded , the money would become relatively unavailable to you until then . Please be sure to have your agent walk through a good suitability study with you to ensure you get the annuity that best suits your need . Feel free to inbox me , if you have further questions . Thank you for asking !
There is no accumulation period for immediate annuities . After you purchase the SPIA -LRB- Single Premium Immediate Annuity -RRB- with a single lump sum amount , you are able to begin receiving payments from the annuity almost immediately . Typically , you will receive your first payment one month after the immediate annuity is procured .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com . Today 's question is : is a single premium annuity a good investment ? Well remember , generally these are interest driven products and single premium annuities could be a period certain . It could be ten years certain . It could be 20 years certain or one of the most popular out there right now is you 're actually purchasing a lifetime of income with a single premium immediate annuity . If it 's nonqualified the money which you originally put into it called basis comes out blended with the gain on this , so there 's a little bit of a tax advantage there . Remember , you ca n't outlive this , so if you become the Guinness Book of World Records or you 're one of Willard Scott 's people who turn 100 every day , you 're going to get that payment and it 's there for the rest of your life . A lot of people like immediate annuities to be the underpinning or their foundation of their retirement . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Types you will hear reference to are : Fixed , Variable , Equity Indexed , Immediate , Deferred , Single Premium , Flexible Premium , with withdrawal penalties , and without withdrawal penalties . Fixed annuities provide guaranteed , fixed payments for the life of the contract . Variable annuities are tied to the market with minimal guarantees but potential for more growth . Immediate annuities are payed with a single premium . Deferred annuities have an accumulation phase in which premiums are paid in periodically .
A single premium immediate annuity is the basic annuity . It provides a lifetime of monthly income in exchange for a single premium . A deferred annuity is different in that it provides that the stream of income does not start immediately , but later , and that the company will accept deposits to the annuity until it starts the monthly income payments . The advantage to this plan is that the growth realized in the deferred annuity is free of current income tax .
SPIA stands for single premium immediate annuity . Which means , you receive a set amount of money on a regular basis , on an annuity you purchased with a single deposited premium . SPIA 's can be very practical , and especially beneficial for specific situations , including : retirement , terminal funding , pension terminations , and retired life buyouts . As well as individuals who have received a lump sum of money from a structured settlement of sorts , like : injury , divorce , or inheritance . The purpose of investing your money in an immediate annuity , is to have a steady income for the rest of your life ; by prolonging the principal without the risk of fluctuations in the financial markets . Plus there can be significant tax advantages , depending on the funding of the premium and the amount of income payments you elected to regularly receive .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Immediate income annuities are for people that want a guaranteed stream of income for the rest of their life or a set period of time such as 10 or 20 years . You purchase the immediate income annuity with a single payment . Immediate fixed income annuities pay a guarantee income interest rate which gives you a predictable income . Income payments usually begin immediately .
An immediate annuity is an annuity where you give a single lump-sum payment and , in exchange , the insurance company pays a guaranteed income for a number of years -LRB- there are options to choose from - some can go for only a set number of years , others can go for life -RRB- . The payments start immediately -LRB- typically the first month following the month the annuity is placed in force -RRB- . Immediate annuities are great for seniors who are concerned about outliving their life savings as it provides a guaranteed income . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
An annuity is a promise to provide a lifetime of payments -LRB- usually monthly -RRB- in exchange for a single deposit . The actuary determines from life expectancy tables the estimated payout and after adjusting for interest the premium is set . This is a single premium immediate annuity . There are a variety of modifications of this basic concept and they involve the accumulation period . If instead of a single payment , you want to make a series of payments these different plans offer different approaches . An annuity has the advantage of accumulating money with the income tax on the earnings being deferred .
Yes , State Farm does offer three types of annuity products at this time -LRB- June 27 , 2013 -RRB- . The titles and descriptions of these three products are : Future Wealth Builder '' -LRB- a flexible premium deferred life annuity -RRB- , `` Future Income Plus '' -LRB- a single premium deferred annuity -RRB- , and `` Guaranteed Income '' -LRB- a single premium immediate annuity -RRB- .
is a non qualified immediate annuity ? Well , an immediate annuity is an annuity that is a payout rather than an accumulation choice . You are making a single payment of funds and will then receive a lifetime regular payout . You can not outlive an immediate annuity . The non qualified part of the name is not a factor as you are not accumulating at this point .
There are two basic approaches to non-qualified annuities : immediate and deferred . Ideally , annuities should be considered ultimately as an income product . Single premium immediate annuities can generate income over a guaranteed and fixed period like 10 and 20 year certain . They can also be annuitized for the life of the annuitant . Their crediting method uses a combination interest rates and mortality credits . Non-qualified deferred annuities have crediting methods that include interest rates , indexed and separate sub accounts in variable deferred annuities .
An annuity is a contract between you -LRB- the annuitant -RRB- and the insurance company -RRB- . Fixed annuities are a type of annuity that has a defined , guaranteed payment structure . The annuitant agrees to pay the insurance company a single payment , or a series of payments , and the insurance company agrees to pay you a fixed amount -LRB- income -RRB- , starting immediately -LRB- an immediate annuity -RRB- or at a later date -LRB- a deferred annuity -RRB- , for a specified time period -LRB- this could be for 10 years , 15 , years , 20 years , for life , etc. -RRB- . You generally want to have the annuity through a financially sound company -LRB- e.g. `` A '' rated or higher by rating companies such as A.M. Best , Moody 's , etc. -RRB- . If you 're concerned about what would happen to your money if the annuity insurer went bankrupt , please be aware there are protections in place in case something like that happened . In each state , insurance companies are required to pay into a state-operated guaranty fund that , in short , acts like an insurance company for the insurance company . It can pay out funds to the beneficiaries of the annuities up to the funds specified maximum allowances . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Does Life Insurance Cost For A 40 Year Old ?
This is a great question , Life insurance premiums vary depending on a number of things such as gender , insurance company , type of plan , riders you may want , amount of insurance you want , if there are any health issues , etc. etc.etc . You can contact us for a personalized quote if you are in one of the states that we are licensed in .
Life insurance rates for smokers may be less expensive than you realize ! Of course , as experienced brokers , our job is to shop , compare and find the lowest prices with the help of our top-rated websites and modern software . Nicotine use is one of the underwriting factors considered when determining rates . However , other factors , such as use of medications , existing conditions and height/weight will also factor in the determination of prices . A few general estimates from top-rated companies : -LRB- Rates are monthly for a healthy smoker...10-year guarantee -RRB- : $ 39 - $ 250,000 40 year old male $ 19 - $ 100,000 40 year old male $ 33 - $ 250,000 40 year old female $ 60 - $ 500,000 40 year old female $ 29 - $ 250,000 30 year old male ALSO ... $ 109.86 - $ 500,000 40 year old male 20-year guarantee
The price of life insurance for a 40 year old depends on the health , tobacco use , weight , and gender of the applicant , in addition to how much life insurance is purchased and what type of policy is bought . Short term policies cost much less than permanent policies . Policies for smokers usually cost at least double the rate of policies for nonsmokers . Coverage for those with serious health conditions can cost 10 times or more of the premium for a 40 year old with perfect health . To get an estimate of a life insurance quote for a 40 year old with your characteristics , you can run a quote on an website advertising `` instant life insurance quotes '' . You can input different amounts and different types of policies to see how rates differ for different scenarios .
The reason that life insurance premiums go up with age is because mortality rates go up the longer someone lives . When someone buys a 10 year term life insurance policy at age 20 , the rates will not be much higher than at age 30 , because the death rate for 30-40 year old persons does not vary much . However , the rates for a 10 year term policy will be much higher for a 60 year old person than a 50 year old person , because mortality rates go up a lot between ages 60-70 , especially for men .
In past years , health insurance was typically more expensive for women under 50 due to the cost of medical care compared to men of the same age . After 50 , rates were typically higher for men , who tend to begin incurring higher medical bills than women after age 50 . Since the implementation of the Affordable Care Act , the cost for coverage for people of the same age can no longer be based upon their sex , meaning the cost of coverage for a 40 year old man would be the same as the cost for a 40 year old female to purchase the same policy .
All 25 year olds are not equal . Life insurance death benefits replace income that dies when the insured dies . If a 25 year old -LRB- or any age -RRB- has other people that would be hurt financially at his or her death , then life insurance might be a smart solution . Granted , a 25 year old single person may not have as much `` need '' for life insurance as a 40 year old with 3 school age kids , but may still want life insurance to replace a financial loss .
The best life insurance plans are different for different people , because no two people have exactly the same financial scenario or personal details . One 40 year old male may own a home , be raising three teenagers soon to go to college , and have no health problems . He is certainly going to want a large policy to cover his family if he should pass away , and to be able to afford that much , he is probably going to want to take it in term insurance . Another 40 year old male may have finished treatments for stage 4 colon cancer a year ago . The policy he gets it going to be much smaller , will probably be whole life , and will be graded for at least two years . While the best plan for his family would be more like what the first man got , the best plan for him , in reality , will be one he can get . He can then replace it with one that has a larger face amount after his cancer has been in remission for a number of years . PS The ironic thing is , most people who can get the best plans for everyone , put it off until they can no longer get them .
The premiums for Critical Illness Insurance depend on your age , gender , and smoking status . Rates in 2009 ranged from an average of $ 200 per year for a 40 year old nonsmoking male , for a lump sum benefit of $ 10,000 . At 50 years old , the average cost for that amount was $ 290 . Cost per thousand went down as the benefit went up , so that the average rate for $ 50,000 for that same man was only $ 730 at age 40 , rather than 5 times the $ 10,000 premium .
To see what life insurance costs for a 40 year old male or female , with different builds and health conditions , you should talk to an insurance professional who asks questions so he/she can quote you correctly . To get a general idea of what different face amount and policy terms would cost for a 40 year old , you can use a free , instant quote engine provided on some life insurance websites . However , that quote could be way off base when risk factors and health conditions are involved . It is always best to talk to someone in addition to getting your quote online .
How much does life insurance cost for a 24 year old ? Well with all types of insurance , provided you are a healthy individual , the price is pretty low . While Term is cheap at this age , so is permanent coverage and a young person should consider the real advantage of locking in their coverage while it is low cost and has the most time to work in their favor . I am so glad as a 53 year old who at 24 was a very atheletic , fit individual who contracted diabetes at 40 and had a bout with A FIB -LRB- heart problem -RRB- at 53 that I locked up my life insurance in my 20 's , when my good health allowed me to purchase it for cheap money . My rates are locked in , I own the policy , they ca n't take it away , they ca n't make me requalify , the policy does n't `` end '' before I do . This is n't even taking intoaccount all the other benefits a permanent policy provides , but the factit 's `` mine '' I `` own '' it , I do n't rent it .
Knowing what life insurance term you should get is something you can best discern for yourself , when you understand how term life insurance is priced . When you purchase a term life insurance policy , you are usually locking in the premium so that it will not go up for a certain number of years . This can be as short as one year or as long as 30 + years . When you choose a longer term , you will find the price is much higher than the premium for a shorter term . That is because the policy is covering a greater risk as you get older . E.g. . If you are age 40 now and take out a 10 year term policy , that policy is only covering you to age 50 . If you take out a 30 year term policy , it is covering you to age 70 . The chance of your dying at age 70 is much greater than at age 50 . And life insurance costs are higher where there is greater risk of death . Term policies roughly average out the cost of insurance for each year you have the policy , and charge you that same price for the entire term . So in the first years of the policy , you are paying more than a person your age would be paying for that risk . In the latter years , you are paying less than a person that age would normally be paying . The advantage to longer terms really shows up when health is taken into account . You may have no trouble getting a preferred rating at age 40 . But to get rated preferred at age 50 or 60 is not as likely . Therefore , having a preferred rating locked in for 30 years offers a huge price advantage to the poor soul who gets rated preferred for a 10 year term policy at age 40 , standard at age 50 , and table 4 at age 60 . Getting longer terms is not for everyone . If you definitely only have a short term need , there is no reason to pay the higher cost of a longer term policy . But IF there is a chance you may need longer coverage , as you can see , locking it in while you are healthy is never a bad idea .
A 2 million dollar life insurance policy will cost much different rates for men and women , young adults and seniors , smokers and nonsmokers , those with perfect health and those who have multiple health conditions . The price also varies greatly according to how long the premium is locked in . Here are some examples of the cost of a 2 million dollar life insurance policy for a 40 year old male who has perfect health . 10 year term - approx $ 50/mo 20 year term - approx $ 100/mo 30 year term - approx $ 200/mo Permanent - approx $ 800/mo You can go to a website that offers instant quotes to see what a $ 2,000,000 policy costs at other ages , genders , etc. .
Disability Income Insurance evaluates health factors , so the cost of the policy will depend on how the applicant is rated health wise . If a nonsmoker who is of normal weight and has no health history , Preferred ratings can be given . The price also depends on the risk of the occupation , how much income the applicant makes -LRB- and how much of that income they want to replace in case of disability -RRB- , and what bells and whistles they want on their policy . For a 40 year old male office worker who makes $ 60,000 per year , the price can be as good as $ 50 per month for a plan that will last to age 65 .
Another part to this answer is that not all life insurance policies ever pay a death claim . Most life insurance is not designed to be in force when you die unless you die younger than average . Term Life Insurance only pays a death claim if you die while it is in force . That 's usually 20-years when you are in your 30 's and 40 's and often up into your low 60 's . But most people do n't die that young . Other insurance is tied to your employer and only covers you during your working years . Most people do n't die during your working years . So the insurance company gets to keep all those premiums . Whole-life insurance is priced much higher than the others because it will pay a death claim 100 % of the time unless you cancel the policy . All insurance is priced based on the likelyhood of it ever paying a death claim . That 's why a healthy 35 year old man can buy a million-dollar 20-year term policy cheaper than a 70-year old would pay for a $ 10,000 whole-life policy . One is very unlikely to ever cost the insurance company anything . The other will certainly be paying a death claim within the next couple decades if not sooner .
That is an interesting question ! I want to make sure you understand what exactly you are asking , and what would happen , as it seems as if the agent you spoke with may have misunderstood you . You have 6 policies totaling $ 31k in face value . Without knowing how long you 've had them , let 's assume they are each at least a couple of years old . There are some things to be aware of here - taking reduced paid up coverage on 4 of them might seem like that would leave you with about $ 20k in coverage , but chances are it will actually be considerably less than that . How much coverage were you wanting to keep on yourself ? The second thing to be aware of is that you wo n't receive any money from taking the reduced coverage , only what you would have paid monthly on them . So again , understanding that I have no information on your policies to go on , let 's assume that they are all for $ 5k apiece and you pay $ 40 total a month in premiums . What you will gain from taking the reduced coverage is considerably less than $ 20k insurance for you , and $ 40 a month more money . Assuming that you are good with considerably less insurance coverage for yourself , and that your daughter 's policy can be purchased for less than that $ 40 a month , you are good to go . Since you are not surrendering any of the policies , there are no replacement issues to worry about , as you 're not replacing anything . There 's a whole lot more information that I would need to really steer you right , so maybe it would be wise on your part to contact someone other than whom you spoke with the first time , and get a better idea . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Auto insurance for an 18-year old can be fairly affordable or quite expensive . The rate depends on the type of vehicle that is being insured , the driving record of the person applying for coverage and where they live . And yes , males are more expensive to drive , which I always found to be quite ironic considering my sisters were the persons in an accident , not me ! Of course , that was 40 years ago . Re the rates of the 18-year old , perhaps as low as $ 50 per month or much much higher . Shopping the top-rated companies will help and that 's what experienced brokers like us will do .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
Short term life insurance , such as 5 year Term or 10 year Term , can cost much less than life insurance locked in for longer periods of time , such as 30 year Term Life insurance or Universal Life . However , when that short term is complete , the price for that policy will jump extremely high . If the insured person 's health has gotten worse during that time , he/she may need to pay much higher premiums or possibly may not even qualify for a new life insurance policy . Therefore , it is important to look at the need involved , when purchasing a life insurance policy . If you are 40 years old and want it to cover your children going to college , getting a short term policy may suffice . If you want it to pay for your funeral , then it is better go with some type permanent plan .
The cost for a long-term care insurance policy from a reputable company is running about $ 5,000 - $ 7,000 per year -LRB- $ 450/mo - $ 630/mo -RRB- for a person 55-60 years old , assuming that the person is healthy and can qualify for `` standard '' rate class . A `` preferred '' rate class would reduce those numbers by about 15-20 % . Discounts can reduce premium significantly , if applicable.Long-term care insurance policies used to cost a lot less . But , to be truthful , insurance companies really miscalculated how much it would cost to pay out the high claims of an average policyowner and how much premium it would take to stay in business and make a profit . Even today , with higher premiums for the same coverage design available 10 years ago , the margins on this type of insurance are very thin . Recent claims history studies have shown that 1 -RRB- policyowners do not allow these policies to lapse - less than 1 % do , 2 -RRB- more policyowners than anticipated are going on claim , and 3 -RRB- the cost of medical facilities and skilled home care is going up at a greater rate than most consumer price indices -LRB- CPI -RRB- . The take-away from all of this is in spite of the high cost , even a small , affordable policy is better than not having any coverage at all . A person 's chance of needing at least some long-term care before death is greater than most other risks that people have insurance for . -LRB- However , it would not be prudent to purchase any long-term care insurance policy if going forward one knows that they will not be able to afford the premiums during retirement . If one ca n't afford the insurance , it is imperative to have a family discussion about a plan for family caregiving that might be needed before one dies . -RRB- There are lots of ways to keep costs for long-term care insurance affordable . Design is everything . To reduce premium and still have value , consider a lower-cost inflation rider or none at all ; increase the maximum daily benefit to a higher amount than needed now and shorten up the number of years the pool of money is projected to minimally last ; buy extra-cost riders only if your situation absolutely calls for them . Finally , buy young . Some LTCi experts suggest buying as young as 40 . Most recommend that one not wait past 60 because premiums really start to climb after that age . By age 50 , you should be seriously considering it . -LRB- I bought mine at age 53 and bought it on my wife when she was 49 , and while it has been difficult in lean years to pay the premiums , I am so glad that we have kept the coverage in force . Neither of us would qualify medically to purchase it now . -RRB-
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is Long Term Care Insurance Premium Deductible ?
Your long term care insurance premium is deductible if you have a qualified -LRB- TQ -RRB- long term care insurance policy . That is because the US government now recognizes LTC premiums as a medical expense . If you have a non-qualified long term care insurance policy , the premium is not tax deductible .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
In all honesty , Long Term Care Insurance is not important for everyone . If you have very few assets and low income , you may sacrifice to pay Long Term Care premiums for extended care that may or may not be needed , and that Medicaid could cover if needed . If being able to choose your own place and type of extended care is important to you , then Long Term Care Insurance is a great thing to own even with low assets , as long as you can afford to pay the premiums . Long Term Care Insurance is most important for those who have an estate to protect . If you have saved up to pass an inheritance to your loved ones , or wish to pass a business to a successor , your intentions could be jeopardized if you were to to need care for an extended period of time . Long Term Care can pay that for you and allow your estate to remain untouched .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The main disadvantages of Long Term Care insurance would be that you would die before you were able to use it or that you would be blessed with a long and healthy life and never need long term care before you passed away . Other than that the disadvantages are that it is becoming more expensive and that fewer insurance carriers are offering Long Term Care insurance . Of course , the reasons for this are testimony to the need for long term care insurance , people are living longer and therefore more people are having some period of need for long term care and long term care facilities are getting more expensive .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
Yes , many long term care insurance premiums can be deducted on income tax as a medical expense . The plans must be qualified LTCI plans . The Long Term Care Federal Tax Deductible Limits for 2013 are itemized on IRS Revenue Procedure : 2012-41 . These limits are age based . Here are how some of the deductions work . 1 -RRB- Working for someone else : Only the portion of total medical expenses that exceeds your adjusted gross income by 7.5 % can be deducted , using Schedule A on your tax return . If your employer pays the full LTCI premium , your employer may deduct the total expense . 2 -RRB- Self employed : The entire premium of you , spouse and dependents -LRB- up to federal age based limits -RRB- can be deducted on line 29 of tax form 1040 . 3 -RRB- C Corporation : 100 % of premium is deductible for employee , spouse and dependents with no age based limits on premium . 4 -RRB- State income tax deductions and/or credits 5 -RRB- Paying premium with HSA .
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover Second Opinions ?
Typically , a health insurance company will make a decision regarding whether a claim should be paid . An underwriter , a claims approver and perhaps another resource may be used during this process . If your claim is denied , you can appeal . Regarding a `` second opinion '' concerning a possible procedure or surgery , your private or group policy will clearly indicate the level of benefit you have . And of course , an experienced broker can also help .
An excellent question that touches on both philosophy and current politics in our nation . In the context of the rights enumerated in the U.S constitution and the natural rights of man historically there is no right to health insurance . In the grand sweep of human history health insurance is a late arrival on the world stage and mankind existed without it for millennia . As health insurance is only a financial mechanism designed to transfer risk by spreading it out over a larger pool of payers it is difficult for me to construe this as an inherent right . By that argument we should all have the right to car or homeowners or pet insurance . This is where I think many people make the mistake of confusing health care with health insurance . Health care , however primitive , has been around for thousands of years and yet Ibelieve most objective thinking people would agree that there has never been an intrinsic right to health care itself . Health insurance , in my opinion , should be viewed as , at best , a social obligation that an individual owes to their society to eliminate or at least minimize the burdens they might place on their fellow citizens and at least what a person should do in their own self interest to protect themselves against serious illness or injury . But whether it is a social obligation or an act of self interest it clearly does not fall into the same category as freedom of speech , religion , to peaceably assemble or petition the government for redress of grievances . To me , it seems that the argument that health insurance is a right is merely anattempt by some -LRB- however well intentioned -RRB- to construct a system that by its very nature centralizes control over the individual and may actually impinge upon their true rights by taking from some to give to others . An ever expanding social contract leads to ever expanding expense which serves to distort the functioning of a society built upon a premise of self reliance first and charity second .
The premium is driven primarily by the amount of coverage on the residence . Check with your agent to see if the amount is excessive . Occasionally , due to annual increases , coverage does exceed the actual cost of reconstruction . The second way to reduce the premium is to increase the deductible . There are small decreases available for the installation of central station alarms . Notice , I didnt suggest that you reduce the liability limits . In my opinion that is just not wise .
Only if it is deemed a medical necessity , and even then the insurer may require a second opinion . Health insurance will not cover a noise job that is being preformed for cosmetic reasons alone . If the noise job were to correct a breathing problem such as a severely deviated septum that resulted in potentially serious complications such as sleep apnea then it would be a qualified medical expense . Also if the nose job was a reconstructive procedure following a serious accident that seriously damaged a individuals face then again yes .
Typically , a health insurance company will make a decision regarding whether a claim should be paid . An underwriter , a claims approver and perhaps another resource may be used during this process . If your claim is denied , you can appeal . Regarding a `` second opinion '' concerning a possible procedure or surgery , your private or group policy will clearly indicate the level of benefit you have . And of course , an experienced broker can also help .
That is a great question ! There are really two schools of thought about life insurance . One school believes that the money that someone would pay for a policy should be saved and invested , and those funds used to ensure the well being of the loved ones left behind . The second school of thought is buy young , and be prepared . I can see wisdom in both views . There can be much higher rates of return on the investments made with what would have been the premium money if invested wisely.But ... I am a pretty staunch realist , and the sad reality is that most Americans ca n't / do n't save , and even fewer know how to invest what they do . As a result , nearly 3/4 's of Americans live paycheck to paycheck , and are one disaster away from bankruptcy . -LRB- Want some scary data for your paper ? Go look at the 2012 Census data ... -RRB- Life insurance provides a `` forced savings '' method of providing for the need for protection . As long as the payments are made , your family is protected . And in my opinion , life insurance provides three serious benefits that the first view ca n't match : There is no guarantee on how long we live , and there is a real chance that disaster could strike before the amount needed to protect your loved ones could be accumulated . With a policy , if it 's in force one day , and you were -LRB- God forbid -RRB- to pass away in an accident on the second , the policy would pay out in full . What investment pays off that well ? Secondly , that benefit paid is tax free , and generally probate free . Many estate battles take years , and on average eat away about 40 % of the value of the estate that would have been left . The third , and in this economy that favors the wealthy and stresses the majority of Americans , a whole life policy provides a source of money in an emergency . As the policy increases in age , it also increases in its cash value . That value becomes available for the policy owner to withdraw if a need arises , with virtually no questions asked . With interest rates and credit ratings what they are for the majority , having a strings free cash source can be a life saver . I hope that gives you some food for thought for your essay . I almost forgot to mention that the younger you are when you purchase your policy , typically the cheaper it is . Most companies lock that price in for you , so it is set for your whole lifetime . As a result , a policy purchased in one 's 20 's typically will be cheaper , and much easier to get than a policy purchased when one is in their 50 's or 60 's . If you 'd like more help , please feel free to contact me . This is a lazy week for most of us , and I 'll have some free time :-RRB- Thanks for asking , and good luck on your paper !
The where/who question is a great one !! Our belief at ' I Hate Buying Insurance ' is the UNDERWRITING is the tail that wags the dog -LRB- one of my fav southern sayings -RRB- . There are hundreds of options across the country for Term Life . Each carrier has a different underwriting appetite . Do you have 5 - 10 extra pounds to shed ? That will be a factor between when determining what health tier you qualify for . Most carrier have 4 tiers & are commonly called Standard , Standard Plus , Preferred , and Preferred Plus . Most life insurance shoppers understand that health plays a huge role in determining the `` rate '' you qualify for . Yet lifestyle , occupation , hobbies , family health history , & more play into the rate you qualify for . A top agency will work with dozens of carriers . What name , mascot , or even financial rating -LRB- do n't sweat A - vs. A + + -RRB- are all secondary to getting the best underwriting for your specific needs . One carrier may offer you Standard while a Preferred is available at a second . Another thing to consider as of this writing is a new generation of Term Life called `` Living Benefits Life '' -LRB- LBL -RRB- You DO N'T have to die to use you `` life '' insurance anymore . Several carriers offer the ability to accelerate when diagnosed with a range of Critical or Chronic Illnesses . Just think of it as accessing the bank vault early . If you were diagnosed with invasive cancer , would n't it be to get a large sum of cash to help pay for deductibles , time away from work , home health care , & travel to the hospital you need that is in a different state ? LBL life might just do all that for you My suggestion for shopping Term Life plans : 1 . If the agent or dot.com you call doesnt ask A LOT of questions about health , history , & lifestyle , RUN . All theyre doing is guessing . Accurate rates do NOT come from age , height/weight , & current tobacco use . The agent needs to interview you so youre matched with the right carrier . 2 . Dont be afraid to ask the agent , What underwriting factors lead you to this option vs. any other carrier ? 3 . See if the agent offers you a LBL option . IF NOT , it is my strong opinion that her/she is NOT on top of current trends . If an agent or dot.com is doing what is best for you , several ideas/options should be explored . If you have any questions or comments , reach out to us !
Life insurance urine exams test for the presence of cotinine residue a byproduct of nicotine products like cigarettes . There is conflicting opinions about the length of time cotinine needs to dissipate from the body to display a negative cotinine reading and sometimes is used to measure second hand smoke .
That is really a personal choice . An attorney can help advise you on specific situations if you have unique or specific exposure concerns . In most cases your local insurance agent will be able to direct you to the coverage that would be proper for you . I would never tell anyone that they do not need legal assistance as each situation is different and it is always good to get a second opinion .
A Critical care policy pays you not the Doctor or Hospital , in the event of an critical illness , such as a heart attack , stroke , major organ failure , Cancer , loss of the inability to perform 2 Activities of Daily Living . The likely hood if you were to suffer a heart attack , stroke , cancer or the like is that you will likely survive . The bills , mortgage , utilities , & such do not stop because you are ill . The money can also be used to offset health insurance copay 's , time off work , second opinion , or anything else . Face amounts usually run any where from $ 4,000.00 to $ 500,000.00 lump sum . Some policies offer a Return of Premium , meaning if you never use the insurance , your estate will receive 100 % of the premium back . HBWavp@gmail.com
In Canada , variable annuities are usually called segregated funds or seg funds . They are similar to mutual funds , but since they are issued by insurance companies they have certain guarantees and features . If you are looking for an equity investment , then segregated funds should be considered . In today 's marketplace there are a wide variety of plans available with very competitive costs . Segregated funds are suitable for self-employed business owners and professionals . In addition , individuals who want to invest in equities , but would like maturity and death benefits guarantees . This is especially important if you are within 10 to 15 years of retirement or already retired . Segregated funds can offer : Death benefit guarantees of 100 % or 75 % Maturity guarantees of 100 % or 75 % Some plans offer the ability to reset or lock in market gains Potential creditor protection Estate planning advantages including avoiding probate which can save fees and provide privacy . If any of these are important to you then , you should consider segregated funds . More information is available at www.ProtectandGrow.ca If you have further questions , would like a second opinion , or believe I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Most agents are not going to outright lie about anything material to a policy . They can be sued if they lie . Some do not tell you everything . If they show you an illustration , are there missing pages ? Do they tell you the good and the bad about what they are showing you . Is the information they are giving you verifiable ? Are they local ? A local agent who has been in the community for years is less likely to be deceptive , his reputation is at stake . How long has the agent been in business ? Again , reputation means a lot , but do n't get me wrong , new agents are honest too . It is just one factor to look at . When you receive your policy go over it with the agent and make sure the things he told you are in the policy and question anything that looks different . If you still do n't have a good feeling then either turn the policy in , most have a free look provision , or get a second opinion from someone you trust .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
There really is not a `` Number 1 '' health insurance company in the US . Although UnitedHealthcare , Aetna , Wellpoint and Cigna are among the largest companies , everyone 's opinion regarding who is the `` best '' insurer will vary . For example , in Pennsylvania , Independence Blue Cross and Highmark are very popular . In Ohio , Medical Mutual is quite popular . So naturally , where you live will greatly influence your opinion .
Term life insurance is really only for specific needs because term life is only insurance against a person dying `` too soon '' . -LRB- Of course dying at any time is `` too soon '' in most people 's opinion ! -RRB- The point being that there are debts or spouse and or children that would need to be financially cared for in the case of the demise of the insured . And that after a certain point in time those issues would no longer be relevant . In my opinion Whole Life is a much superior product and has benefits and advantages for the entire life of the insured no matter how well off the family is and if there are no debts ! You should consult with an experienced Insurance Adviser / broker to help you with your specific situation .
You ask a philosophical question in a practical environment . My personal opinion is that it is not ethical to force a person to purchase any product or service . The counterpart to that though is that it is not ethical for someone to expect others to pay their health care expenses . In a perfect world everyone would act responsibly , a part of which is managing life 's risks , one of which is your health care needs , both present and future . As experience has shown us , not everyone acts responsibly and every individual has their own idea on what an acceptable level of risk is for them . A health insurance plan with a $ 10,000 deductible would be of no concern to Bill Gates or Donald Trump , that same degree of financial exposure would be a financial catastrophe for a minimum wage worker . Other people are philosophically opposed to the concept of health insurance and others just do n't have enough regard for their fellow citizens that they feel any guilt about passing their burdens off onto their neighbors . Our society is struggling with this issue and will be for years to come . What you must come to grips with is that as of 2014 you now are in a legalenvironment which does essentially require that you have health insurance . Fortunately , at this time , it is not a criminal offense to not have health insurance and you are only subject to a mild -LRB- but growing over time -RRB- penalty for being uninsured .
There are many opinions on the best type of life insurance and without trying to sound smart the best is the one in force when needed . I work with many people each year on life insurance and everyone has a different scenerio and you need to find someone you trust to consult with . There honestly in my opinion is not a one size fits all . There are many great products out there that can fit your needs and your budget . Ask questions , research and again find someone you trust .
That is a great question ! The deal is that it really boils down to how well you manage your money , in my opinion . The sales pitch for a flexible premium policy is that you have the ability to be `` flexible '' with your payments - you might pay a little more than the premium , skip a payment entirely , or overpay , as you see fit . If you are the type of person that is very closely watching your expenditures , and keeps a sharp eye on your investments , then this policy type can be potentially helpful in the convenience it offers . But ... If you are like the overwhelming majority of Americans -LRB- 77 % - an unbelievable 77 % !! -RRB- that live paycheck to paycheck , part of the 66 % without adequate -LRB- or any -RRB- savings , or the 35 % with a bill currently in collections , this may not be a good thing . The Bible tells us that while `` All things are permissible , not all things are good . '' That is solid wisdom , in this case . The temptation here is to believe that the `` flexibility '' offered here provides you with more wiggle room in payments . While that is true to some degree , the truth is that there is a bottom line cost that has to be regularly covered or the policy goes under and lapses . Once it does , everything that you 've paid into it goes under also . Sadly , what happens to those who have problems with cash flow and/or money management is that they make payments that cover those costs for a while , but slowly start underpaying or skipping payments , and the result is that the minimum premium payment goes up , it becomes unaffordable , more payments are underpaid or missed , and the policy goes down like the Titanic , taking all your money with it . So it is generally my opinion and recommendation that having a single , set premium payment policy is generally a safer bet . If the payment is budgeted for , and prioritized , there is far less chance of the policy falling behind and lapsing . The offer of flexible payments is definitely tantalizing , but then again , most of the things that are bad for us generally are ... Bottom line ? If you are good with your money and keep an eye on your financial matters , there are times when having that flexibility can be helpful . If you feel that money management may be an area of opportunity for you , perhaps the stability of the fixed premium policy would be a safer choice . I hope that helps , if you have any questions , please do not hesitate to inbox me , okay ? Thank you very much for asking !
The question of whether Term is better than Whole life insurance is really a question of opinion . In my opinion , in no case is term better than Whole Life insurance . Is it cheaper - yes . Is it equal when it comes to death benefit - yes - IF it 's paid . As one agent said to me , `` when you give the check to the beneficiary will they say , `` oh this is no good - it came from a term policy '' . . ? '' Thing is most often the death benefit is never paid on term policies . That 's why they 're relatively so cheap . -LRB- Of course that depends on how old a person is when the policy is implemented . -RRB- There are so many more benefits with Whole Life that really Term can not compare . Please see the article at this link : WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Is Health Insurance In Retirement ?
Depends when you retire really because being in retirement has nothing to do with the prices . You 'd likely be looking at an individual health plan if you 're under age 65 so it will depend on your age , zip code , what health plan benefits you want , etc. . The premiums can be a as little as a couple hundred dollars per month or well over 500 per month . If you 're over 65 , you 're likely looking at Medicare coverage if you do n't qualify for any retiree programs from an employer . On Medicare , you 're looking at a couple of different options . If you want more comprehensive type coverage , you would want to buy a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- and pair it with a Part D prescription drug plan -LRB- if you want drug coverage -RRB- . If you want a Medicare type program that works similar to under age 65 individual health insurance works , then you may want to consider a Medicare Advantage plan . Medigap plans are standardized and do n't have annual enrollment periods to follow - Part D plans and Medicare Advantage plans do . The premiums for a Medigap plan depends on which one you want to get -LRB- there are 11 to choose from -RRB- , your age , zip code , and if you smoke or not . Medicare Advantage and Part D plans that are available depend on your zip code . You should consult with an independent insurance agent or broker who can discuss your specific insurance needs and preferences to determine which is the most suitable coverage for you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
In order to determine how much you need to save for retirement , you first need to define what a successful retirement means to you . The next step is to do a budget to determine what is needed to finance your desired lifestyle . This is a better approach than simply randomly choosing a % of your current income . There are calculators available on many websites to help you determine how much you will need to save to generate a specific retirement income . Given the complexity of retirement planning though , you would be best served working with a financial or retirement planner . There are resources and additional information on Retirement Planning on my website , www.jpw.ca . It includes a Retirement Planning Checklist that will save you time and money . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The answer to this is very subjective depending upon your situation , but I 'll try to make it a little more simple . The idea has always been that , when you retire , your need for life insurance decreases . Today , that 's not always the case . It 's much more complicated now , but there are some universal ideas : What is your need for pure death benefit ? How much debt do you have and how long will you have it ? How is your pension , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , etc. set up ? Will the income from this be set up in a way that can provide both you and a spouse with adequate income should either of you die ? If not , how much income do you need to provide in the event of your death ? What will your death cost in terms of funeral expenses , taxes , and estate settlement ? Do you want to have that provided for ? Do you have people or institutions that you want to leave money for ? Will one or both of you need special care ? When you answer these questions and have an amount in mind , it 's time to explore how best to go about setting it up the right way . I 'm not going to go into the type of insurance or any income you may need to offset a shortfall in your retirement . That 's a much larger discussion that I 'll leave for you and an agent you can trust . He/She will be able to talk with you and come up with the program that fits your need and your budget .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
If you are asking how do youcalculate how much do you need to save for retirement there is a process to follow . First you need to determine what retirement success looks like to you . Your retirement planner may be trained to help you if not a lifestyle planner could . The next step to figure out what that lifestyle wouldcostand make a retirementbudget . Now you can do somemeaningfulcalculations . Total up what income you expect from any government plans , pensionplans , etc. . Compare this amount to your retirement lifestyle budget . The difference is what needs to be funded byadditionalsavings . There are calculators on the websites of financialinstitutionsto give you an idea . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
How much you need to save for retirement by the time you are 40 depends of course on your desired retirement lifestyle and the amount needed to fund it . Without those details , I unable to offer you an opinion . There are online calculators available of course . However , here is a retirement worksheet to help you understand the process . I have used 6 % for illustration purposes only , it could be higher or lower and is only to give you a point of reference . Age 65 was used as the retirement age -LRB- 25 years in the future -RRB- , Again . this is for information purposes only . 1 . Annual retirement income which must be provided by savings $ _____ 2 . Amount you must save to generate income $ _____ -LRB- line 1 . X 11.55 -RRB- 3 . Amount you have already saved $ _____ 4 . Amount these savings will have grown $ _____ by the time you retire -LRB- line 3 X 4.2919 -RRB- 5 . Amount of savings still needed $ _____ -LRB- line 4 minus line 2 -RRB- 6 . Amount you need to save each year $ _____ -LRB- line 5 X .01720 -RRB- If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The best retirement plan for you needs to be tailored to your financial goals . You need to determine whether you are going to fund a qualified or non qualified plan . You need to determine your retirement time horizon . How long and how much will you contribute ? You need to establish your risk tolerance . What returns are you looking for and what is your risk to your contributions ? You need to estimate your life expectancy . How many years will I live during retirement ? These are a few factors that can assist you and your adviser is selecting the right retirement plan for you .
Regardless of whether you are in you 50 's and are asking how do I start planning or if you are asking how do I plan on retiring when I am in my 50 's the process is the same . First determine what a successful retirement would look like for you . Once you have a basic outline then you can determine what needs to be done to fund it . The next step would be to work with a financial planner to calculate what needs to be done and how your resources should be allocated to make it happen . You will find addition information on retirement planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Who Offers Medigap Insurance ?
Many `` big name '' carriers including Blue Cross , Mutual of Omaha and United Healthcare offer Medigap insurance in almost every state . If you want real value you should consider some of the smaller carriers . For example , in Georgia and Tennessee you can often save $ 300 or more by picking someone other than the big name carriers .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In addition to what Jason stated , I 'd also like to point out that not all insurance companies offer Medigap Select plans . In fact , the insurance companies that offer Medigap Select Plans often are the major companies advertising online . Their premiums are usually high and to make the Medigap Plan more ` affordable ' , they offer the Medigap Select . One of the great benefits of having a Medigap Plan is your freedom to choose any Medicare provider without the boundaries of a network . Getting a Medigap Select Plan will limit your freedom . While you may be happy with your local in-network hospital , if you want to see a cardiologist in a neighboring state , you 'll be out of luck on a Select Plan . There are dozens of insurance companies that offer Medigap Plans at affordable prices . I 've never had to offer my clients a Medigap Select Plan F , G or N because I 've always found them an affordable Medigap Policy by taking the time to shop the Medicare Supplement market .
Yes ! Humana does offer Medigap plans . Of the 11 different plans in the marketplace , Humana offers Medigap plans A , B , C , F , G , K , L , N , and High-deductible F - please note , not every medigap plan may be available and may not be sold in every area . Medigap plans are the same from every company because they 're standardized by the government . The only difference between the coverage from each carrier is the price they charge for it . Price quotes are determined by the quoted plan -LRB- s -RRB- , your age , zip code , any tobacco usage , and marital status -LRB- some carriers offer rate discounts if married and if spouses applying together -RRB- . It 's important to compare the rates from every available option in your area -LRB- including Humana and every other insurer offering Medigap plans in your zip code -RRB- so you can secure your desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost . If you need quotes for Humana 's Medigap plans -LRB- as well as those from other carriers to compare to as well -RRB- , please give me a call at 888-972-0024 - that connects to my office directly -LRB- not an automated system -RRB- . You can also send me an e-mail by clicking on the `` contact me '' button next to my name . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
The best way to compare prices on Medigap policies is to speak with an independent Medigap insurance broker . Independent brokers can sell Medigap policies from just about every company that offers Medigap plans . Since all Medigap plans are standardized and the only difference is price , you can compare plan F 's from every company that offers it in your zip code to see which carrier will offer you the coverage at the lowest possible cost -LRB- same goes for comparing plan G 's , N 's , etc. -RRB- . I would also compare the prices of plan Fs and plan Gs because the benefits are identical except plan G has a deductible of $ 147 -LRB- the Medicare Part B deductible in 2014 and 2015 -RRB- . If the difference in price is more than $ 12.25 per month , plan G would be a better deal for you . If the difference in price is less than $ 12.25 per month , then plan F would be a better deal for you . I would be happy to help you with your Medigap coverage and compare Medigap plans and quotes from every company offering them to you in your area - our agency is licensed in over 35 states and over 50 insurance companies . Please feel free to contact me for assistance . Thanks very much .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
My Blue Medigap is Medicare Supplement insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan . My Blue Medigap offers three Medigap Plans -LRB- A , F , N -RRB- through Blue Care Network . Medigap Plans A , F , N are standardized . The Medigap benefits from one company are the same exact Medigap benefits with another company -- the only difference is price . My Blue Medigap will have a different monthly premiums than other private insurance companies offering Medigap Plans A , F , N. It 's worth contacting an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can provide quotes in just a matter of minutes from companies you wo n't see online . We 'll do a side by side comparison showing you which company has the best Medigap price . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your specific situation .
There are many companies that offer Medigap plans , but not every company offers every plan and in every state . Most insurance companies have a handful of states they do business in for their Medigap plans and only sell several of the available plans -LRB- e.g. company XYZ only sells Medigap plans A , F , G , and N -RRB- . Since Medigap plans are standardized -LRB- meaning the coverage is the same , regardless of the company it 's through - the only difference being the price of the coverage -RRB- , it 's important to find out all of the carriers that offer plans in your zip code . Some of the big name companies in the Medigap marketplace include , but are not limited to , United Healthcare -LRB- parternered with AARP to use their name on their Medigap plans -RRB- , Omaha , WellPoint -LRB- Anthem and other Blue Cross carriers -RRB- , Aetna , Cigna , Humana , Central States Indemnity , Medico , New Era , Royal Neighbors of America , United American , and Equitable , to name a few - there are a number of other companies out there in the Medigap marketplace . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- offers great peace of mind when it comes to your health care . Original Medicare Part A and Part B , generally cover 80 % of your Medicare approved amounts for covered medical costs . Medigap Plans will help pay that remaining 20 % by covering the costs of copays , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some people think they do n't need a Medigap Plan because they have n't had any health issues . While that is great news , we do n't have a crystal ball to predict the future . A Medigap Plan that is already in place is there to offer that protection when you need it . If you wait until a significant health issue arises , it may be too late . Medicare Supplement insurance companies use medical underwriting to issue policies . If you 're not in a Guaranteed Issue or Initial Enrollment situation , you will have to answer health questions . Medigap policies do not fall under the Affordable Care Act umbrella , so insurance companies can deny you a policy based on your health . I 'll close with an example of a lady who called me wanting to add a Medigap Plan to her Original Medicare Part A and Part B . She was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mastectomy . As you can imagine , her hospital and doctor bills were substantial and she was looking for some help . I had to share the unfortunate news with her that because of her recent diagnosis she would not be able to apply for a Medigap policy at this time , but possibly in two years we could re-evaluate her situation . That 's quite a bit of time for more bills to pile up . Had she already put a Medigap Plan in place , her savings would be substantial . Just for example sake , a Medigap Plan F might cost someone $ 130 a month or $ 1,560 over twelve months . Still a lot lower than 20 % of a $ 100,000 operation . A couple of the most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. & nbspMedigap Plan F will cover all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any deductibles , co-insurance , or co-pays . Plan G acts just like Plan F after you have met the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you would like more information about the benefits of Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 . You can also visit my website at www.remedigap.com and check out my client testimonials .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
AARP Medigap plans are Medigap plans insured through United Healthcare . In short , AARP partnered with United Healthcare to attach their name to UHC 's products . As Medigap plans feature standardized benefits , the coverage under each Medigap plan is exactly the same as it would be if you purchased the coverage from another carrier . The main way the AARP Medigap plans differentiates themselves from other Medigap carriers is through their premium rating method . Most carriers determine their rates based on the attained-age rating method -LRB- your age at the time you apply with rates increasing as you get older each year -RRB- . AARP Medigap plans -LRB- insured through United Healthcare -RRB- are based on the community-rated method -LRB- everyone in an area pays the same rates regardless of their age - meaning an 85 year old is paying the same thing as a 75 year old -RRB- . Please note , the carrier also offers value-added services such as discounts for certain things such as eye exams and also offer a 24/7 nurse hotline , and silversneakers membership . You must be an AARP member to buy an AARP Medigap plan - membership can be attained during the application process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and comparison and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best Medigap insurance can be found with the company that offers the lowest premium for the Plan you want . It 's really that simple . All Medigap Plans are standardized . This means each lettered plan has the same exact benefits from one insurance company to the next ... the only difference is the price . CMS has safety nets in place for Seniors , so if you have a Medigap Plan your bills are going to be paid according to the benefits of your Plan . If you have Medigap Plan F , all your Medicare approved charges will be covered and you do not have to pay any deductibles or coinsurance . Medigap Plan G works just like Plan F and covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible . With so many insurance companies available who sell Medigap insurance , it is wise to work with an independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . That way you can choose the best Medigap Plan that is right for you .
The best Medigap Plan is the one that meets your needs . With that said , Medigap Plan F is widely touted as the best Medigap Plan . It 's very popular because it has the most comprehensive health care coverage of all Medigap Plans . Medigap Plan F covers all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance . As long as you pay your monthly premium , you will receive your Medigap Plan F benefits . Some would argue that Medigap Plan G is becoming the ` best ' Medigap Plan . It acts just like Plan F after satisfying the annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium for Plan G is often lower than Plan F. . . which is why many people like it . It 's a personal preference as to whether or not you want to pay the Part B deductible yourself -LRB- Plan G -RRB- or have the insurance company do it for you -LRB- Plan F -RRB- . Some of my clients do n't like to be bothered with paying any bills , so Medigap Plan F works for them . While I have other clients who would rather save money on their premium and do n't mind satisfying the deductible . If would like more information regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me . In a matter of minutes , I can provide you with information on Medigap benefits and quotes for your area .
The best way to buy a Medigap Policy is through a licensed independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . We work closely with you to make sure you understand the benefits associated with Medigap Plans and how they work for you . Independent agents are not employed by insurance companies . Instead , we have contracts with multiple carriers that allow us to shop the Medigap market and find you the best price for the Medigap Plan you desire . Some people like to avoid insurance agents and do the work themselves , but with Medigap insurance that is not going to save you time or money . Most insurance companies will not provide their insurance premium information to the public . The carriers who do share their premiums with you will , often times , be much more expensive . I have done a fair share of helping people move from their expensive Medigap premium to a lower one while still keeping their same exact benefits . Most of the time they had no idea there were other insurance companies available to them . If I can help you with your Medigap insurance needs , please feel free to call me at 1-888-411-1329 or visit www.remedigap.com .
Medigap or Medicare Supplemental insurance is private health insurance put in place to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . It will help cover some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does not pay . For example , Original Medicare will pay around 80 % of your health care costs . This leaves you with the responsibility of paying the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved amounts . Medigap insurance will help pay copays , co-insurance , and deductibles -- the ` gap ' in Medicare coverage . Medigap Plans are standardized . There are 10 lettered Plans all offering different Medigap benefits . However , each lettered Plan has standardized benefits . This means Plan N with ABC insurance company is the same Plan N with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . The most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. Plan F covers all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any copays , co-insurance , or deductibles . Plan G covers all Medicare approved amounts -LRB- just like Plan F -RRB- after you 've met the small annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you are shopping for Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance , it is often challenging to find premium information on your own as many insurance companies do not publicly publish their premiums . With that said , you will find some very large insurance carriers who will give quotes online . This , though , can come with a higher premium to you . Another option is to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We freely shop the Medigap market and find you the best premium for the Plan benefits you desire . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your Medigap insurance needs .
You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There is an `` open enrollment period '' during which you can buy any Medigap insurance policy -LRB- Plan F -RRB- sold in your state beginning the month in which you turn age 65 and you are enrolled in Medicare Part B . During this six month open enrollment period , you can buy any Medigap insurance offered , even if you have health problems , for the same price as people in good health . If you apply for Medigap coverage after your open enrollment period , there 's no guarantee that an insurance company will sell you a Medigap policy if you dont meet the medical underwriting requirements , unless you 're eligible because you have group health insurance through an employer or union . If this is your situation , the Medigap enrollment period begins when you sign-up for Part B . There are some situations if you are under 65 and are eligible for Medicare because of a disability you could be eligible for Medigap coverage . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- and are under 65 , some states require at least one type of Medigap policy to be offered to you .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
You first want to research the types of benefits available under a Medigap plan , decide which of these benefits you want , and then select the Medigap policy that meets these needs . All of the Medigap plans are standardized so the benefits under a given plan is the EXACT same from every carrier . So how do they differentiate themselves in that type of marketplace ? They feature different rates , rating methods - community rated , issue age rated , and attained age rated , and value added services -LRB- e.g. UHC plan members can get discounts for vision or dental services and access to the senior sneakers program through AARP -RRB- . A lot of people think `` Why do n't I just get a plan F ? All of the benefits available are included in that plan ! '' While this is true , this plan is also going to be the most expensive . If you 're on a fixed income , you may want to try to keep your cost down . Therefore , a different plan may be more appropriate for you . For example , a plan G offers all of the same benefits as a plan F , except for the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 for 2014 -RRB- . However , a plan G is going to be cheaper than a plan F -LRB- and usually by a good margin -RRB- . Plan N can also reduce premiums by a substantial margin and offer great coverage as well - the difference from plans F & G being a small copay is due when you go to the doctor -LRB- up to a $ 20 copay -RRB- or the hospital -LRB- up to a $ 50 copay -RRB- and excess charges are not covered . Plan N is most useful for someone who 's doctors accept Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- when accepting assignment , a doctor accepts the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full and can not bill you an excess charge -RRB- . Another major point to keep in mind is where your health is now and where it may be in the future because you might not be able to switch to another Medigap plan later if your health drastically changed down the line , you may not be able to qualify for a new plan if medical underwriting is required . The rating method a carrier uses is an important factor to consider here . You also need to find out which carriers offer the plan in your area . Remember to keep in mind that not every carrier offers every plan . Because there are many health care plan options available to seniors , it 's most helpful for you to work with an experienced broker who can guide you through all of these steps . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Do Life Insurance Proceeds Go Into Estate ?
Life insurance will only go into the estate if the named beneficiaries are deceased and the beneficiaries were not changed or if the estate is the named beneficiary . It is important to review your policies to make sure they are properly set up . I have ran into occasions for example where a husband and wife die close together and did n't have time to change the beneficiary . If a contingent beneficiary had been named , that beneficiary would have received the money . Because no contingent beneficiary was named the money went to the estate .
It 's almost always a bad idea to have your estate listed as the beneficiary of your life insurance but I see policies that list it that way fairly often . You wantyo always have a living adult listed as your beneficiary and have a 2nd living adult as you backup or contingent beneficiary . That way the payment from your life insurance will bypass the estate and be paidtto your beneficiary with no probate costs or delays . It will also prevent creditors from having access to your life insurance benefit .
Life insurance proceeds can go the estate of the insured on purpose or by accident but there is no reason they should . Naming a beneficiary and reviewing periodically is usually the right thing to do . If the estate is the beneficiary , the access of the heirs to any money associated with the life insurance policy is delayed because the money must go through probate . Probate may , in some cases , cause a delay of a year or more . Life insurance proceeds left to the estate , like any asset left to the estate , are forced through the probate process and therefore become part of the public record , so privacy is lost . Perhaps most importantly , in most states , the money paid into probate becomes subject to the claims of creditors of the estate .
life insurance proceeds are payable to an insureds estate , is their value includable in the insureds estate - The entire value of the proceeds must be included in the insureds gross estate even if the insured possessed no incident of ownership in the policy , and paid none of the premiums . -LSB- 1 -RSB- But proceeds payable to an executor in his or her individual capacity rather than as executor for the insureds estate were not treated as payable to the insureds estate by the Tax Court . -LSB- 2 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Est. of Bromley v. Comm. , 16 BTA 1322 -LRB- 1929 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Friedberg v. Comm. , TC Memo 1992-310 . When are life insurance proceeds that are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate includable in the insureds estate ? Proceeds are includable in an insureds gross estate if the insured legally possessed and could legally exercise any incidents of ownership at the time of the insureds death . It does not matter that the insured did not have possession of the policy and therefore was unable to exercise his or her ownership rights at the time of his or her death , -LSB- 1 -RSB- or that the insured was unable as a practical matter to effect any change in the policy because the policy was collaterally assigned . -LSB- 2 -RSB- The proceeds are includable even if the insured can not exercise his or her ownership rights alone , but only in conjunction with another person . -LSB- 3 -RSB- It has been held that an insured did not possess incidents of ownership where the insured had paid no premiums , did not regard the policy as the insureds own , and had made an irrevocable designation of beneficiary and mode of payment of proceeds . -LSB- 4 -RSB- But even if the proceeds are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate , and the insured possesses no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds are nevertheless includable in the insureds gross estate if they are receivable for the benefit of the insureds estate . Even though the insured retains no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds may be includable in the insureds estate if the insured has transferred the policy within three years before the insureds death . -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Comm . v. Est. of Noel , 380 U.S. 678 -LRB- 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Goodwyn v. Comm. , TC Memo 1973-153 . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- ; Goldsteins Est. v. U.S. , 122 F. Supp . 677 -LRB- Ct. . Cl . 1954 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . Can an insured remove existing life insurance from his or her gross estate by an absolute assignment of the policy ? Yes , assuming the insured lives for at least three years after the assignment , the insured assigns all incidents of ownership , and the assignee is not legally obligated to use the proceeds for the benefit of the insureds estate . -LSB- 1 -RSB- If the form of the assignment reserves any incidents of ownership to the insured , the proceeds may be included in the insureds gross estate despite the insureds clear intention to transfer all ownership rights . -LSB- 2 -RSB- It has been held that where the insured had paid no premiums and had never treated the policy as his or her own , the insureds irrevocable designation of beneficiaries and mode of payment of proceeds was an effective assignment of all of the insureds incidents of ownership in the policy . -LSB- 3 -RSB- The amount of any premiums paid on the assigned policy by the insured may be included to the extent they are paid within three years of death . A reversionary interest in a policy is an incident of ownership if , immediately before the insureds death , the value of the reversionary interest is worth more than five percent of the value of the policy . -LSB- 4 -RSB- The insured will have no such reversionary interest , however , if the policy is purchased and owned by another person , or if the policy is absolutely assigned to another person by the insured . Regulations state that the term reversionary interest does not include the possibility that a person might receive a policy or its proceeds by inheritance from another persons estate , by exercising a surviving spouses statutory right of election , or under some similar right . They also state that , in valuing a reversionary interest , interests held by others that would affect the value must be taken into consideration . For example , a decedent would not have a reversionary interest in a policy worth more than five percent of the policys value , if , immediately before the decedents death , some other person had the unrestricted power to obtain the cash surrender value of the policy ; the value of the reversionary interest would be zero . -LSB- 5 -RSB- An insured was treated as holding a reversionary interest in a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement where the insured was considered to have transferred the policy to the trust and retained the right to purchase the policy for its cash surrender value upon termination of the buy-sell agreement . -LSB- 6 -RSB- However , a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement would not be includable in an insureds estate under IRC Section 2042 where -LRB- 1 -RRB- proceeds would be received by a partners estate only in exchange for purchase of the partners stock , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- all incidents of ownership would be held by the trustee of the irrevocable life insurance trust . -LSB- 7 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Treas. Regs . 20.2042-1 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- , 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Lamade v. Brownell , 245 F. Supp . 691 -LRB- M.D. Pa. 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Piggott v. Comm. , 340 F. 2d 829 -LRB- 6th Cir . 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- . -LSB- 5 -RSB- . Treas. Reg . 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- . -LSB- 6 -RSB- . TAM 9349002 . -LSB- 7 -RSB- . Let . Rul . 9511009 .
Yes . There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that it offers , helps protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that they offer , they protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trusts receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy . The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Estate planning is preparing how your estate will be distributed and minimizing/paying off applicable estate taxes upon your death . Life insurance can be used to pay the estate taxes . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is alegal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trustsreceive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a massive tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . So the question becomes , would you rather pay the estate tax with 100 % of your own money -LRB- with after-tax dollars -RRB- or would you rather pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . If you want the latter , you can purchase a life insurance policy.The type of policy you should set up will depend on the specific circumstances , but for many situations it will usually be a survivorship universal life policy if the proceeds are to be used for estate tax purposes . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to discuss the available courses of action to set up a sound plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any questions . Thanks very much .
An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries .
Life insurance proceeds generally do not go into the estate at the time of the insured person 's death . However , some people designate the estate as the beneficiary , in which the death benefit would go through probate . They will also go into the estate by default if all beneficiaries named are deceased . To avoid life insurance proceeds from going to the estate , name a person or organization as beneficiary .
Life insurance is not for the living , but for those left behind . Only you can answer the question , `` Do I need life insurance ? '' . The most common purpose of life insurance proceeds is to replace lost income of the decedent and pay debts of the estate . But personally owned life insurance is much more . Large estates with complicated and non-liquid assets should consider life insurance to cover estate shrinkage and add liquidity . Larger estates also usually incur tax liabilities that can be paid with life insurance proceeds . Some individuals like to endow charities or educational institutions with life insurance proceeds . One of the most debated life insurance needs is on the life of a child . Many will argue that children do not incur debt nor do they generate income , so there is no need to buy life insurance on a child . As a parent I can think of nothing worse than the loss of a child . Feeling pressure to return to work the day following services because of financial needs would only compound the loss . Parents need time to grieve the loss of a child and do so with dignity .
Debt collectors can go after life insurance if the insurance proceeds go to the estate of the insured . If the insured person passes away with debts and their beneficiary is their estate , debt collectors can try to get their life insurance . If the insured person passes away with debts but leaves the life insurance proceeds to a person , debt collectors can not go after life insurance from that person . The only way they can go after life insurance proceeds from the beneficiary is if the beneficiary was a co-signer to the debt .
Life insurance proceeds rarely incur any form of income tax . The proceeds can be taxed for estate and inheritance tax purposes . Life insurance proceeds are included in the gross estate calculations for all deceased individuals . Any gross estates that have a total value exceeding $ 5.25 million can be subject to US Federal Estate Tax . Additionally , some states impose either an estate tax or inheritance tax -LRB- or in some rare cases both -RRB- . These taxes have their own specific rules about the total amount and what might be taxable . You should consult additional resources concerning state specific estate and/or inheritance taxes for more information about how life insurance proceeds might be taxed in your state .
Life insurance benefits are income tax free , but they can be included in the calculation of your taxable estate for estate tax purposes.The life insurance proceed amount is included in your gross estate if the proceeds are paid to the estate - this can happen if the named beneficiaries predecease the insured or if the estate is named the beneficiary directly . A life insurance trust can help keep the proceeds out of the calculation of the estate - the trust would become the owner and beneficiary of the policy and control how the monies are paid out .
When the owner of a life insurance policy names the estate , or the executor of his estate of his estate , as the beneficiary , the proceeds from the life insurance will be part of his estate when the insured person dies . This is also true if he transferred ownership from the estate , or executor of the estate , to someone else , within three years before the policy paid out . If the surviving spouse is the beneficiary or a policy owned by the insured spouse who died , the funds are not a part of the estate . If there is no surviving spouse , the life insurance proceeds are a part of the estate .
Life insurance proceeds can go the estate of the insured on purpose or by accident but there is no reason they should . Naming a beneficiary and reviewing periodically is usually the right thing to do . If the estate is the beneficiary , the access of the heirs to any money associated with the life insurance policy is delayed because the money must go through probate . Probate may , in some cases , cause a delay of a year or more . Life insurance proceeds left to the estate , like any asset left to the estate , are forced through the probate process and therefore become part of the public record , so privacy is lost . Perhaps most importantly , in most states , the money paid into probate becomes subject to the claims of creditors of the estate .
To expand a bit ... Life insurance proceeds are among a class of assets that `` pass by contract '' at death ; in this case , the contract is the insurance policy with its beneficiary designation . -LRB- Other assets that pass by contract include IRAs / Qualified Retirement Plans , annuities , jointly-owned bank or investment accounts , etc. -RRB- Assets that do n't pass to a beneficiary by operation of a contract are subject to probate , which is where a will comes in . It is possible to have the proceeds of a life insurance policy be distributed according to the terms of a will by naming the insured 's estate as the policy beneficiary -LRB- e.g. Beneficiary : Estate of the Insured -RRB- . However , doing so is generally avoided because of the disadvantages inherent in the probate process : During probate , a will is subject to being challenged by anyone with standing -LRB- generally , anyone who can prove a relationship to the deceased -RRB- . A beneficiary designation is n't subject to those types of challenges . Assets of the probate estate are subject to the claims of creditors of the estate ; life insurance proceeds paid to the insured 's estate may get depleted to repay debts before the intended heirs receive any benefit . The probate process is a public court proceeding , andcan be lengthy . A life insurance death benefit claim involves only the beneficiary and the insurance company , and claims are generally paid very quickly - often within two weeks .
There can be federal estate tax exposure on life insurance death benefit proceeds . To avoid federal estate tax exposure , many estate attorneys recommend using an irrevocable life insurance trust to own the life entrance policy , which in effect then is deemed as being out of the estate . Some estate planning strategies use other family members as the policy owner to accomplish removing the future death benefit proceeds outside the estate . Consult your estate planning attorney before moving forward with any ownership changes or assigning ownership to a life insurance policy .
VA Life Insurance is not taxable , as long as the beneficiary of the policy is not the `` estate '' . When life insurance proceeds are left to the estate , they are taxable , whether issued by the Veterans Administration or from a private source . But life insurance proceeds left to a person or group do not generally incur income tax . VA Life Insurance is also subject to estate tax if the amount of the death benefit , added to the value of the estate , exceeds the exempted amount . Only the excess is taxed with estate taxes , and the federal exemption is 5.25 million this year . Some states have state estate -LRB- inheritance -RRB- taxes and some do n't .
In short , when it 's part of the calculation of the estate . The IRS code permits a unified tax credit to pass a certain value of property to a spouse without having to pay a tax . When you exceed that value -LRB- a taxable estate -RRB- , a tax is applied that must be paid within 9 months of death . If the decedent is single , the tax is due accordingly . If the decedent is married , the tax is due after the second death -LRB- death of the spouse -RRB- . A common course of action people take to minimize the estate taxes they will be subject to is creating an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- . An ILIT is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . These trusts receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds and help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . Any life insurance policy you buy will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate - a substantial tax savings and key advantage in the estate planning process . If you keep the policy outside of the trust -LRB- e.g. , as owned by a natural person or a revocable trust -RRB- , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate you may inadvertently increase the size of the estate , and be subject to paying much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is Private Health Insurance ?
Private health insurance is coverage that you buy yourself instead of having it provided through an employer . As an experienced broker , our job is to find the most affordable plans available through the highest-rated insurers . If you qualify for the new federal subsidy , we will calculate the amount and explain how that can reduce your premium . Each State Exchange/Marketplace will have an Open Enrollment which allows consumers to apply for coverage regardless of pre-existing conditions .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
G'day mate , you nearly had me stumped with this question . Lifetime loading is a feature of the Australian health insurance system and not a part of health insurance plans sold in the United States . Down under , if a person over age 30 does not purchase private health insurance they will become subject to a premium penalty -LRB- or loading -RRB- of 2 % for each year they have delayed in purchasing private health insurance . For example , Mr. Dundee waits until he is 35 to buy private health insurance . He has waited 4 years past being age 30 and his monthly premium as a 35 year old will be inflated by 8 % -LRB- 2 % x 4 years -RRB- above what the premium would have been for someone who has had coverage since they age 30 . This legal approach is designed to incentivize Australians to purchase private health insurance .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
Private split dollar life insurance is a plan that allows for the costs and/or benefits of a life insurance to be split between two private parties . Those participating in private split dollar arrangements are usually family members or their trusts . Often , a second to die life insurance policy is used with a life insurance trust . To find out more about options using private split dollar life insurance , contact a knowledgeable life insurance agent .
There is no uniform health insurance system in Europe , each nation has it 's own system . On the whole , European nations have taken a more socialized approach to financing health care than we have in the United States -LRB- though ObamaCare is kind of changing that -RRB- . In Switzerland you are mandated to purchase private health insurance . In Britain they have the National Health Service that provides health insurance for the masses while at the same time having a growing private health insurance and health care delivery system for the people who can afford to operate outside of the national system -LRB- the class system remains alive and well in England and many European nations -RRB- . Some European systems give the illusion of being `` free '' but people are really paying for their care in the form of higher taxes and rationing of care along with price controls on healthcare providers . While there are things we Americans can learn from the European experience , the Europeans have hardly achieved perfection when it comes to health care and health insurance .
Government employees generally get their health insurance from the FEHB program -LRB- Federal Employee Health Benefits -RRB- rather than buying health insurance through the health insurance exchanges or a group plan through the private sector . The programs are structured in a similar manner to health plans available to private-industry workers - e.g. networks for plans can be structured with an HMO , PPO , Fee-for-service , etc. and feature deductibles , coinsurance , HSAs , HRAs , etc. .
Private Disability Insurance is Disability Insurance that is purchased privately vs being supplied by the insured person 's employer in a group policy . Persons who are self employed , or who do not have group Disability Insurance because their employer does not offer it , are most likely to buy private Disability Insurance .
Universal health insurance can also be referred to as single payor health insurance and is a term used to denote a health insurance system that covers all citizens of a nation . Generally the concept of a Universal Health Insurance system is used in reference to the government run or managed systems such as are found in Canada and many European countries . While there are variations on the theme from country to country the objective , as the name implies , it to provide health insurance coverage to every citizen of the country regardless of their income or health status . Usually Universal Health Insurance systems are funded by taxes paid by the nation 's citizens and businesses . The concept of Universal Health Insurance sounds appealing to many and is becoming part of the ongoing debate in the United States about how to finance our citizen 's health care needs . In theory everyone would have comprehensive health insurance coverage with the cost spread out amongst every citizen and with lower overhead costs as a single , government run agency administers the health insurance system . In practical terms , the real world results of such systems have fallen short of perfection and have their own sets of problems and sources of dissatisfaction just as we experience with our current mixture of private and public based health insurance systems here in the United States .
In the vast majority of situations the answer is no . Medicaid is a state-run insurance program designed to help low income persons pay for their health care . As a general rule you must not be able to afford to pay for private health insurance in order to qualify for Medicaid . However , this is a government program we 're talking about so there are always some exceptions buried in the fine print . This is where things can get complicated and the rules can vary from state to state in some situations . Some state Medicaid programs will assist in paying private insurance premiums for a person who can not fully pay them . A low income person who has recently lost their job and their health insurance through their former job may be eligible for assistance in paying their COBRA premiums in some states . You would have to check with your state 's Medicaid office to learn what the rules are in your particular state . Also , you have a limited amount of time to apply for such assistance after losing your job in states that provide this type of assistance so time is of the essence . Medicaid also has a special program for people diagnosed with AIDS that may qualify them for premium payment assistance . Once again , you will need to check with your state 's Medicaid office to determine what their policies and procedures are for qualifying for such assistance .
Do you need private disability if I have group disability ? Depends . If you have group first , individual -LRB- private -RRB- disability will be limited as most plans only allow 60-70 % income replacement from all sources . Group usually covers 50-60 % of income . It will also most likely be taxable income so you have to decide how long you can get by on anywhere from 35-50 % of your total income . Where individual disability would step in is to fill that income gap . This is the reason I answered `` depends '' . It is what do you want , what the contracts actually say and what you can afford ? One thing to consider if you are new to the workplace is to get your individual disability first . You can protect 100 % of your income or even greater if your individual is in place before group .
In 1959 , Congress passed the Federal Employees Health Benefits Act -LRB- FEHBA -RRB- . Its primary purpose was to attract & retain talented personnel to compete with the private sector . It is made available to both active & retired workers . Congress participates in the FEBHA . Currently , the FEBHA offers about 300 different plans with a `` defined contribution '' approach ; wherethe better the benefits the more the cost to the employee . The plans are definitely better than private sector insurance and where the private sector has virtually eliminated retiree benefits , the FEBHA has not . So , member of congress that serves just one term would be eligible for the benefits for remainder of his/her life . It is not necessarily special to them , but it is different and probably a much better plan than the average American would have access to plus it can be carried throughout the retirement years .
A Medicare levy surcharge is levied against taxpayers in Australia who do not take out private hospital insurance , and who earn above a certain income . The Medicare levy is intended to encourage Australian citizens to take our private cover and use the private system to lessen the burden on Medicare .
Yes , people can collect Social Security Disability benefits , and do not have to buy private Disability Insurance to get cash while being disabled . However , to get Social Security disability benefits you must generally be disabled for at least a year , and be unable to work -LRB- or be trained to work -RRB- at any job . Private Disability Insurance pays benefits more quickly . Also , with DI , if you have the `` own occupation '' feature , it pays if you can not work at your OWN job , not just ANY job . Finally , private disability insurance pays a higher benefit than Social Security DI . You can even supplement SSDI with DI .
You can get up to a total of 80 % of your income through a combination of private Disability Insurance and Social Security Disability benefits . If the amount that you are due exceeds 80 % , part of the Social Security benefit will be subtracted from the private Disability benefit , or part of the private Disability benefit will be subtracted from the Social Security Disability benefit , so that the total you receive is 80 % of your original wages .
Humana is an Insurance company that offers products for Medicare beneficiaries . These product include Medicare Supplements or Medigap insurance for gaps in coverage of Medicare Part A and Part B . These policies have different levels of coverage identified by letters . Humana offers Medicare Advantage policies or Medicare Part C. Medicare Advantage is a private insurance company providing Medicare benefits equal to Medicare Part A and Part B with some additional benefits . You are no longer using your Medicare card for benefits but will use a private insurance card and they pay for your medicare care . You have to check your county to see what Insurance companies offer these plans . Humana offers Medicare Part D which is prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries . Each county offers different plans and you would have to check to see what plans are offered in your county . Medicare is a federal health plan offered to persons who meet the qualifications .
That is a great question ! I guess the best way to answer it is you say pota-toe , they say pota-tah . Technically , Medicare is public , because it is administered by the Federal Government . But ... they use private insurers to run it . The best way to describe it is that it 's like the way your employer runs their insurance program - it 's public , because it 's offered to all employees and they pay for some of it , but the plans are offered through a private insurance company . The confusion for the public vs. private debate was an attempt by debating politicians to generate confusion , and make things difficult . Since that seems to be what we pay them to do , they were just really doing a good job ! I hope that this helps a little at simplifying the answer for you . If you would like to try to clear this up a little more , please feel free to contact me , I love a challenge ! -LRB- And who better to challenge us than a bunch of politicians ? -RRB- Thanks for asking !
The federal government does not offer short term disability . Government workers do not have a directly sponsoredprogramthat they are automatically enrolled in . They can purchase private coverage . There are several private companies that allow government workers to purchase group policies and pay for them with a deduction initiated through the worker 's pay center . The federal government supports social security disability for private workers , but this program does not cover temporary disabilities . Your disability must be expected to last twelve months or longer , or result in death .
PFFS stands for Private Fee For Service . A Private Fee For Service plan is a type of Medicare Advantage plan under Part C of Medicare . This type of plan is sold through private insurance companies . The plan determines how much it will pay doctors and hospitals at the time of the care . You will need to present your plan ID card every time you go for a doctor or hospital visit . The doctor 's office/hospital has to agree to the plan 's terms and conditions on each visit - they reserve the right to accept it one time and then refuse it another . In the event of an emergency , doctors and hospitals must treat you .
There is no one national `` best of breed '' when it comes to heath insurance . Health insurance is driven at the state level and therefore varies greatly from one state to the next . Even products and rates from the same national insurance carrier will vary from state to state . People 's definition of `` best '' vary from person to person as well . For some it 's the plan with the lowest monthly premium cost for others it is the plan with the richest level of benefits . In that sense , only you can determine what private health insurance plan in your state are the best fit for you . I would recommend you seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is certified to sell health insurance both on and off of the government health insurance marketplace to help you determine what the answer to your question is for you specifically .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Would I Be Refused Life Insurance ?
Someone can be refused life insurance for a number of reasons . The most common reason is having a health condition that is not accepted for the policy you applied for , or your health condition is not as controlled as the life insurance company would like to see it . It does not mean you do not qualify for ANY policy , it just means that you may need to apply elsewhere and possibly take less and/or pay more . Other things besides a health condition that can cause life insurance to be declined are : participating dangerous hobbies such as motorcycle racing , having gone through recent substance abuse treatment , having a recent bankruptcy , or plans to travel to an unsafe country . Also , there are age restrictions . If declined , do n't despair and do n't give up until you 've explored more options . A good impaired risk life insurance agent will be of great assistance .
Yes , you can refuse Medicare A . But there are no premiums for Medicare Part A. S o unless you do not want to burden the government with paying a great portion of your hospitalization services , there are not a lot of reasons to opt out of Medicare Part A . You will be automatically enrolled in Medicare A when you turn 65 , so will just need to fill out a form to state the reason why you are refusing it .
I have an in ground pool in my own back yard and we absolutely love it . It 's great being the house that all my kids ' friends want to go to . But , does it increase my insurance premiums ? Not necessarily , although it probably should . I 'll explain why in just a moment . First , let 's look at what an insurance company wants if you do have a pool . The biggest thing they want is a fenced enclosure around the entire pool . They want to be sure that anyone who enters the pool intended to enter the pool . Also to keep animals and small children from wandering into the pool . It 's usually not a case of a premium increase , it 's a yes or no question . If you do what they want -LRB- fence -RRB- , they 'll usually insure you with no increases . If you do n't do what they want , they 'll just refuse to insure you . Now , why would your premium increase ? Because a pool brings more liability along with it . Bad things can happen even if you take precautions . I would recommend liability limits of at least $ 500,000 and , usually at least a $ 1,000,000 umbrella policy . Doing this may cost you a little more but it 's well worth it . It may be as little as $ 85/year or it may be a little more depending on your home , cars , and family . Be smart , spend small dollars now to avoid big dollars later .
I have a hard time imaging how backdating a car insurance policy could ever be good for the insurance carrier so , all the carriers I am familiar with refuse and prohibit backdating . I can think of a couple of reasons it is desirable to backdate insurance from the customer point of view : 1 -RRB- To be able to prove insurance to a regulatory or financial entity on a certain prior date when coverage was not maintained . 2 -RRB- To be able to obtain coverage for a loss and avoid out of pocket expenses on a certain prior date when no coverage existed . Most carriers carefully underwrite the reason why any date but the present date is installed on an application for insurance . It is often also true that state law makes it illegal for an agent to backdate coverage . It does n't matter if it is car insurance , home insurance , or even life insurance , backdating is a bad idea for the insurer and the agency or agent . On this point , however , there are companies in the life insurance portion of my business that will permit backdating to save age . They wo n't accept this provision if the insured is not healthy or there are health events that create concern in the period of time back to the prior birth date . If you are not healthy now , they wo n't issue the coverage . Then , if they agree , all the premium back to the prior date will need to be paid but , the customer will enjoy a permanently lower rate based upon the prior age so this is the only time I am aware of when backdating - and I use the term very loosely here - is permitted on a written insurance policy . On car insurance , no backdating method I know of exists for all the reasons I have written -LRB- and some I have n't -RRB- .
If it is due to an accidental overdose reaction to a prescription drug the policy would pay . If it is due to an overdose of an illegal drug the company would investigate the history of drug use and if it was found you lied on an application they would probably refuse the claim . Usually the claim would be refused since it would be hard to prove that the deceased was not taking illegal drugs prior to issue of the policy . After two years the policy would pay regardless as has been stated .
When a person applies for life insurance they make representations . The company issues the policy on these statements . If the person makes false representations the company has some recourse to refuse coverage normally for a limited time . If the person commits suicide in the first two years , most companies will refuse coverage . When a life insurance company refuses coverage they return the premiums paid .
I do n't know that you are required to use Medicare if you do n't want to but the question is , why would you refuse ? Medicare is heavily subsidized by taxpayers making it the most affordable form of health insurance available in the market place . Only Medicaid is less expensive to the patient .
This is an extremely sensitive topic . The death of a spouse can be life-shattering . A suicide can make it almost unbearable . Not too long ago a friend and client committed suicide . She had been going through a tough spell emotionally , and then almost out of the blue took her own life . Left behind a loving husband and three young boys . Very , very sad . I expedited the claim , as is my usual practice . This job is usually tough , and the fact that her family and mine are friendly made it really hard . My friend , her surviving husband , was so upset he could n't even complete the claim form . I did it for him . The insurance carrier paid the claim as the policy was over two years old . That is standard practice . Will they never pay before then ? I can say that I know of a case with a very high-profile insured who apparently committed suicide just a year after his policies were issued -LRB- he had several - lots of coverage -RRB- . The carriers , of course , initially refused to pay . The insured 's lawyers eventually convinced them to do so : why would they want the bad publicity of not paying a claim ? Will they always pay after two years ? My own feeling is yes , generally , but suspicious circumstances may interfere . If the carrier has reason to believe that this tragic event had been planned to take place right after the two-year anniversary . . Sometimes life is like a mystery novel .
Of course you would be running the risk of financial ruin if something bad happens to your health , but I assume you already know that . In regards to the new laws , as part of the Affordable Care Act you are now required to carry health insurance . There are a couple of exceptions . You can refuse on religious grounds , or based on a fact that it is beyond your means to purchase health insurance -LRB- too expensive -RRB- . If the government disagrees with you , or if you ca n't take one of those exceptions , you may owe a penalty of 1 % of your income or $ 95.00 / person -LRB- whichever is higher -RRB- for 2014 . In 2015 that tax penalty goes up . Why are you considering dropping your health insurance ? Are you aware that many people qualify for free or reduced price health insurance under the Affordable Care Act ?
Most companies will have a medical question referring to it or similar . Had a customer black out due to low blood sugar and carrier was refusing to pay due to disclosure failure . Had another customer who was blind in one eye . That carrier did not have a medical question about that -LRB- only diabetes -RRB- . customer never had a wreck with the good eye ... can not say the same for the other . He said it was not his fault he did not see it coming -LRB- did not turn his neck far around enough to look -- carrier did pay . Usually if the car is adapted for a disability no problem . They have not figured out how to adapt for blackouts for high or low sugar.Did have one customer upset that a carrier would not insure her , she explained that she only had seizures at night and saw no reason why she could not drive in the daytime .
Doctors CAN refuse to bill through Medicare , but will work on a cash payment . Some doctors do notlike the `` payment schedule '' of Medicare services , some see the value of serving a growing population and will bill through Medicare . We , here in CA , are finding that there are a lot of doctors not willing to bill Medicare or Medicare plans . But if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , more of the doctors will accept billing for this - not sure why , because they have to send out two bills - one to Medicare and one to the plan . Always call your preferred doctor 's billing department to ask what they acceptbefore deciding on which kind of Medicare plan you will enroll in .
Depends on several factors including the State involved , the relative underwriting policies of the various carriers and the breed of dog . Since there are more than 4.5 million dog bites each year in the U.S. with more than 50 % of them occurring on the dog owners ' premises , it is easy to see why this can be a huge issue with regard to dog ownership and homeowner insurance coverage . The liability coverage supplied in homeowners and renters policies is at risk depending on these factors . In most States , it depends on the breed of dog . Be upfront with a prospective or existing insurance carrier . Some carriers will increase your rates if you are an existing customer and others may refuse you as a customer . Others may be precluded from doing so , based on State regulations . Your agent can help you with this process and should be able to tell you the position of each carrier with regard to your specific breed of dog .
When you turn age 65 you are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . You can refuse either part if you wish , but refusing Part A will disenroll you from Social Security . If you are covered under an employer group health insurance plan you probably do n't need Part B.
Yes , Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance . In fact , she is the primary caregiver for her mother who lives with her in Florida . In an article written forSun Times Media , LLC , dated Sept. 4 , 2012 , she relates how difficult it has been taking care of her mother . Although Suze Orman had - and still has - the means from her business to take care of the costs of long-term care insurance , she reports that she tried and tried to get her mother to sign off on an LTCi application , but she refused to do it . Her mother said she would n't ever need it and that it would be a waste ofmoney . It costs approximately $ 25,000 / month for Suze to keep her mother at home and have the best quality care around the clock . That 's about average for 24/7 home care with skilled nursing . If Suze 's mom were to go into a Nursing Facility , the cost would be much less , but would still be from $ 7,000 - $ 12,000 per month , depending on whether she had a semi-private or private room . Suze indicated that as a young professional financial advisor , she saw `` clients who would spend all the money that they had earned over a lifetime on a long-term care stay . '' She advised that , `` If you can afford LTC insurance and you are in your early 50s or older , now is the time to look into getting it . '' But , she also cautions that if you ca n't , '' ... dont buy it because you will end up dropping it and wasting your money . '' She concludes her article with the irony of her own personal situation with regard to buying long-term care insurance . `` Over the years , I have had some health problems that are fine today . But , when I went to get my own LTC insurance policy two years ago I was denied for recent health reasons . If I had just gone one year earlier , that would not have been the case . '' -LRB- Suze Orman donated her fee for writing the article to Blue Planet Network , which aims to bring sustainable safe drinking water to people in rural communities around the world ; blueplanetnetwork.org . -RRB-
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
In my personal experience , all the companies I have worked with want to provide a service for their clients and do it honestly . They try hard to be fair and sometimes I have seen them bend in favor of the client . I think what people hear are the few times someone has been `` wronged '' by the company . From my own personal experience in such a case , I can say that companies can not air their side of the story . With one company I used to work with , the company offered a fair offer to settle in a small kitchen fire . The client refused and wanted the entire house rebuilt . The client went public about how the company would was not making a good offer . Over a year later , the community realized how unreasonable the client was being and his support dwindled quickly . The company had no recourse . The agents had no recourse . They could not talk about the details due to privacy issues . Meanwhile , the client is making every effort he can to publically trash the company . There are some situations where the company has to go by what the contract states and there may be some situation where it may not feel `` right '' to the client , but the company has to honor the contract . With all that said , I would recommend working with a broker to help you find an insurance company and also help fight for you in those situations where you feel like you have been wronged . Having a broker who is familiar with the people in the company will help your case more than you can imagine .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Fortunately , I 've never run into this with any of my clients . But I can not think of any reason that a life insurance policy would refuse payment for death in a hunting accident . There is no question on the application asking about hunting as an avocation , and if the death was truly accidental , the policy should pay out .
I am very sorry to hear about your partners rough morning ! I am glad that she and her passengers are ok . Unfortunately , I 'm sure that you have a pretty good idea of what the worst case scenario will be - she is an at fault motorist involved in an accident , she is not an insured in your car , your insurance company refuses to pay , and you are stuck with the repair bill , and she gets a ticket . It may work out that if you go to court , and she is able to prove that the other driver was at fault , that you may be able to file a claim against them , and maybe recoup some of your losses . Your best bet is to contact your agent , explain what happened , and ask for their advice on how to proceed . Good luck ! If there is any way that I can help , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
If an insured commits suicide within the first two years of coverage , the claim would be denied under virtually any company . Also , if someone commits a material fraud in their application and that is detected within the first two years , the policy would be cancelled with the money refunded . Otherwise there would be no valid ground for refusing a claim on life insurance . However , some lesser companies do all they can do to deny a claim or to delay payment . On the other hand , New York Life is a prompt payer on claims and is proud of that fact .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is The Cost Of Part D Medicare ?
Medicare Part D , the prescription drug coverage , is a privately insured plan offered by insurance carriers that offer Medicare approved plans . Each plan is different . Some have deductibles others do not . All have copay 's and coinsurance . The price varies by the number of drugs covered and the amount you are expected to pay for the drug .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
If youdefinehaving insurance coverage for your prescription drugs when you are age 65 + as `` good '' when prior to the Bush administration 's implementation of this plan seniors on traditional Medicare did n't , then Medicare Part D is definitely a good thing . In fact , some would argue that Medicare Part D , with its pesky reliance on private insurance options and marketplace competition , is the only part of Medicare that has delivered on it 's promises of expanding coverage for a high utilization population segment and managed to come in under initial cost projections . Medicare Part D is just another level of Medicare coverage specifically designed to address prescription drug coverage . As with Medicare supplement plans , different insurance carriers offer Medicare Part D plans with different levels of coverage and price points for consumers to select from during their initial eligibility period and subsequent open enrollment renewal years . This means that the consumer is obliged to shop around because not all Medicare Part D plans are created equal , far from it . Most consumers would be well served to use the services of an insurance broker who is knowledgeable in the various Medicare Part D plans available in their marketplace .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
Most eligible retirees do not pay a premium for Medicare Part A . Once you have accumulated 40 Social Security credits -LRB- that means you have paid Social Security employment taxes for 40 or more quarters -RRB- you do not have to pay a Medicare Part A premium . Most eligible retirees pay a monthly premium of $ 104.90 for Medicare Part B for 2014 . This premium is however more for higher income individuals/couples . A premium chart is available on Medicare.gov . A typical stand alone Medicare Part D prescription drug plan will cost around $ 30 per month . Each of these parts of Medicare -LRB- A , B , and D -RRB- have deductibles and co-payments/co-insurance ; all details are available on Medicare.gov . Retirees often purchase a Medicare supplement insurance policy for an additional premium to provide coverage for Medicare Part A and B deductibles and co-insurance , or enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- Part C -RRB- to package and control costs of Medicare coverage . The average annual out of pocket cost per Medicare beneficiary per the most recent data is $ 4,600 per year . Any individual 's `` cost '' of Medicare will ultimately vary based upon their unique attributes and circumstances ; but to understand the variables and get some control over costs it isadvisableto meet with alicensed insurance agent/advisor who specializes in the senior/Medicare market .
For all intents and purposes , the answer is no . There are certain drugs , which must be prescribed , e.g. Cancer treatment drugs , that are covered under Medicare Part B. Drugs covered under Medicare Part B would also be covered under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs however are not covered by traditional Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- or Medigap supplemental insurance . An eligible Medicare beneficiary needs a Part D prescription drug plan in order to obtain drug coverage . You can enroll in a Part D plan at Medicare.gov , subject to certain enrollment period restrictions . As an alternative to a stand alone Part D plan , a beneficiary can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes Part D coverage -LRB- MAPD -RRB- . A beneficiary who enrolls in an MAPD can not have a Medigap policy or a stand alone Part D plan . It 's a good idea to find a licensed insurance agent who specializes in Medicare plans to review your needs and objectives and present you with optimal solutions .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
You can get Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage when you have Medicare Part A and/or Part B . You can purchase the plan through a broker licensed to sell Part D plans or sign up directly through the Medicare.gov website . If you do not enroll in a Part D plan when you 're first eligible , you would have to wait until the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- to get a plan - the effective date for the coverage would be January 1 of the following year . Another way to get a Part D plan outside of the AEP is qualifying for a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. coming off of group coverage -RRB- . For a full list of qualifying events and other Part D input , consult with an experienced broker -LRB- licensed for Part D coverage -RRB- or go to the Medicare.gov website . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
You can get Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage when you have Medicare Part A and/or Part B . You can purchase the plan through a broker licensed to sell Part D plans or sign up directly through the Medicare.gov website . If you do not enroll in a Part D plan when you 're first eligible , you would have to wait until the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- to get a plan - the effective date for the coverage would be January 1 of the following year . Another way to get a Part D plan outside of the AEP is qualifying for a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. coming off of group coverage -RRB- . For a full list of qualifying events and other Part D input , consult with an experienced broker -LRB- licensed for Part D coverage -RRB- or go to the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part D is your prescription drug plan . It is a good idea to have a Part D plan in addition to a Medicare Supplement Plan . When someone turns 65 they go on Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B . They get Part D to cover prescriptions and a Medicare Supplement Plan to cover what Part A & B does not .
According to Social Security , you are automatically enrolled in Medicare after receiving disability benefits for two years . The two parts of Medicare coverage you are enrolled in are the hospital insurance and medical insurance . Hospital insurance -LRB- Part A -RRB- is established to help pay for your inpatient hospital bills and some of your follow-up care . The taxes you paid while working helped pay for Part A coverage , so it 's no cost to you . Medical insurance -LRB- Part B -RRB- is provided to help pay your doctors ' bills , outpatient hospital care , and some other medical services . If you choose to enroll in Part B , this coverage comes with a monthly premium . Some other parts of Medicare include : Medicare Advantage -LRB- Part C -RRB- Prescription Drug Coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- Part C plans are made available in many areas across the country . Part C allows you to receive all of your health care services through medical plans offered by Medicare approved private companies . Once you are on Medicare , you also have access to Part D or Prescription Drug Coverage . This type of coverage helps pay for your doctor prescribed medication . If you are a Medicare Beneficiary with low-income , you may be able to get assistance through your state for the payment of your Medicare premiums . To see if you qualify for assistance , it is best to contact your state or local Medicaid agency or welfare office .
Azilect is a medication that is covered under Medicare Part D -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- . You have to be enrolled in Original Medicare to get a Part D plan . You can also enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- like an HMO or PPO -RRB- that includes Part D prescription drug coverage . Any drugs that are covered under Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- are ones that get administered in a doctor 's office -LRB- injections -RRB- , certain oral anti-cancer drugs , drugs used with some types of durable medical equipment -LRB- nebulizer or external infusion pump -RRB- . Sometimes drugs are covered under very limited circumstances -LRB- certain drugs in a hospital outpatient setting -RRB- . Since it falls under Part B , you pay the 20 % of Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . If you feel like you need help paying for your Medicare prescription drug costs , you can contact Social Security -LRB- 1-800-772-1213 -RRB- to apply for Extra Help . According to CMS , Extra Help is a `` Medicare program to help people with limited income and resources pay medicare prescription drug plan costs , like premiums , deductibles , and coinsurance . ''
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
To confirm whether Part B will cover Prolia and what conditions must be met to have it covered , you will need to contact Medicare directly . I believe Prolia has been covered under Medicare Part B for a number of years up to one injection every 6 months - typically required to be recommended by your physician . It can often be listed under Part D plans ' formularies as well , but as it is often administered by a doctor , it would typically be cited under Part B. Please note , Part D plans can change their coverage year to year - they are not guaranteed renewable and every plan is different . The drugs that a plan covers can change , the premiums , deductibles , copays , coinsurance , and other factors of a plan can change each year . Plans can even be terminated or replaced and therefore automatically disenroll the consumer , forcing them to select another plan . For the insured person , it 's vital they review their prescription drug coverage each year to determine what plan will best serve their needs for the coming year . When Prolia is covered under Part B , a Medicare Supplement plan might cover the other 20 % of the cost after Medicare pays it 's 80 % share . Whether the Medigap insurer will cover the other 20 % would need to be confirmed with a carrier - when it comes to drugs covered by Part B , there 's usually a couple extra conditions that have to be met for it to be covered as most drugs are covered by Part D. I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with Medicare Supplement help . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
The Federal program known as Medicare does not have comprehensive prescription coverage . Medicare Part A covers hospitalization and Medicare Part B covers doctors visits . Medicare Part D is the prescription drug coverage and Medicare Part C is a plan that combines Parts A & B -LRB- and often D -RRB- into one plan . Both Parts C & D are run by private insurance companies which contract with the Federal government to offer these plans .
Humana is an Insurance company that offers products for Medicare beneficiaries . These product include Medicare Supplements or Medigap insurance for gaps in coverage of Medicare Part A and Part B . These policies have different levels of coverage identified by letters . Humana offers Medicare Advantage policies or Medicare Part C. Medicare Advantage is a private insurance company providing Medicare benefits equal to Medicare Part A and Part B with some additional benefits . You are no longer using your Medicare card for benefits but will use a private insurance card and they pay for your medicare care . You have to check your county to see what Insurance companies offer these plans . Humana offers Medicare Part D which is prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries . Each county offers different plans and you would have to check to see what plans are offered in your county . Medicare is a federal health plan offered to persons who meet the qualifications .
If you have a Medicare Part D -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- , you should be able to call your Part D insurance company to find out which pharmacies are in your area that accept your Plan . Another way to find out which pharmacies accept your Medicare Part D plan is to visit medicare.gov and choose the tab that says Drug Coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- . Scroll to the bottom of the list and select Find Health and Drug Plans . You will now be on a page titled Medicare Plan Finder . Enter your zip code in the General Search box and click on the Find Plans button . You are now on a page that is Step 1 of 4 . Complete the appropriate information for the questions asked and click the Continue to Plan Results question . Step 2 of 4 asks you to enter your drugs . Youll need to enter the name of at least one drug . Once completed , you can submit the list and youll move to Step 3 : Select Your Pharmacies . The database will show you pharmacies in your area . You can change the range of miles within your zip code from 1 , 5 , 6 , and 8 . The database provides phone numbers for the pharmacies . It is in your best interest to call the pharmacy and make sure they accept your particular Medicare Part D plan before venturing out to fill your prescription .
end question
start question
annuities
What Are The Best Annuities To Buy ?
To determine whether an annuity is best for you , you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment and your life expectancy . Annuities have three basic crediting methodologies : fixed interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting or debiting . The second item to determine is your effective tax rate . Once you have established these two parameters , financial profile and tax bracket you can review the top ranked annuities that are suitable for you .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
In short , it depends on the size of the annuity -LRB- how much you want to put it in -RRB- . If you want to buy an immediate annuity , you 're paying a sum of money to the insurance company in one payment and you 're done - you start receiving annuity payments immediately . If you want to buy a deferred annuity , you are paying premiums to the carrier throughout a given number of periods - you start receiving annuity payments at a future point in time . The advantage being that the monies put into the annuity grow tax-deferred . What you get out of the annuity will vary a lot as well because each carrier that offers annuities will offer different interest rates so one company may offer a large payout to you than another even though you 're putting in the same amount of money either way . This is where an independent annuity broker comes in handy because they can work with you on a personal level , compare options from multiple carriers to see which will offer you the best payout , and get your annuity set up - plus , brokers do not charge fees for their services so you can only help yourself . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
That is a great question ! The question is really not accurate though , it 's like asking why all dogs bite people . Not all dogs do , but the ones that do give them all a bad name . Are variable annuities bad ? They most certainly can be , if your risk tolerance is low , or your allocations made unwisely . Just like you would pick a dog that suits your needs and temperament , you should choose an annuity to suit you also . The risk in a variable annuity may not be right for you , but may suit someone else quite well . Please take the time to discuss what you are looking for with an agent that will listen , and take your concerns to heart . If they pressure you , or appear to be more interested in the sale than what you say , do n't buy , and send them packing . Annuities are not something that you can afford to buy without completely understanding what you 're buying . I hope that helps , please contact me if you need more information , okay ? Thanks for asking !
The best annuities are the ones you own . If you are choosing which annuity to buy , you will find that there is a wide range of options available . There are two basic types of annuities , immediate and deferred . If you have funds that you are prepared to invest now in exchange for an income flow that starts immediately , then you want an immediate annuity , otherwise you want a deferred annuity . The range of annuities ranges from guaranteed to speculative . Some require specific licenses . The investment should be paired with your risk tolerance . The best annuity is one that does not cause you stress and meets your financial objectives .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
You can purchase an Annuity from a few different sources . However the best way is to use an independent insurance agent who specializes in annuities . An independent agent can shop the market and all the different companies/products to give you the best annuity for your situation . You can also get annuities from captive insurance agents who work only for one company . They are limited -LRB- or highly encouraged -RRB- to just sell annuities from that one company . And since annuity rates are constantly changing and no one company has the best rates for all types of products , some consumers see this as a disadvantage . Some banks provide annuities , however their selection is often limited . Financial Advisors sometimes sell annuities as well as some stock brokers ; however , they usual stick to mainly variable annuities that are directly invested in the stock market . You can find an independent annuity expert online via a web search for them in your area . Or at various websites such as WEBSITELINK
Generally , when you buy an annuity you 're going to keep it for the life of the contract . Annuities can be cancelled early , but you will likely have surrender charges and certain tax implications involved if you do . What kind of annuity you have may have different penalties for surrendering the annuity early . If you surrender the annuity before 591/2 , I believe you can face a 10 % federal tax penalty on the value of the annuity . You should definitely talk it over with your annuity agent before making any decisions so you know what may happen if you surrender the annuity early . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Generally , when you buy an annuity you 're going to keep it for the life of the contract . Annuities can be cancelled early , but you will likely have surrender charges and certain tax implications involved if you do . What kind of annuity you have may have different penalties for surrendering the annuity early . If you surrender the annuity before 591/2 , I believe you may/can face a 10 % federal tax penalty on the value of the annuity . You should definitely talk it over with your annuity agent before making any decisions so you know what may happen if you surrender the annuity early . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You should talk with an independent life insurance agent so they can review options from multiple carriers with you , help identify the risk class you 're looking at with various carriers -LRB- a critical part when looking for coverage -RRB- , and identify the policy structure that will best serve your needs and your budget . It 's also highly , highly recommended that you do NOT apply to a bunch of carriers at the same time just to see what sticks - this can be a red flag to many carriers and they 'll want to know what your plans are with each policy , total amount of coverage you plan on keeping , as well as the underwriting results from them . There is no one policy that is the best for everyone as we each have our own needs and purposes for buying life insurance . Some may buy life insurance because they just got married , some because they have a new child , some for estate planning , and some for income replacement , just to name a few reasons why people buy it . In evaluating which is best for you , there 's a number of factors to consider such as what type of coverage do you want/need , the reason you want to buy it , how much coverage and for how long -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- , premium affordability , health status , where you live , and others . One of the first things you need to do is identify the risk classification you qualify for . The risk classification is critical because this determines what the premiums will be for the policy you 're applying for . This is where insurance brokers are essential in your pursuit of coverage . They have the knowledge to guide you through the process and help you find the policy that 's going to be most suitable for you .
You can buy annuities from a life insurance agency that sells them . Annuities are contract between the annuity holder and the life insurance company that carries that annuity . Therefore , you buy them from agents who represent the companies that carry the annuities you wish to buy .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
The main risk people face with fixed annuities is the buying power of the payments you receive because they do not have a cost of living adjustment -LRB- COLA -RRB- built in . Annuities offering COLAs are available , but generally require a higher premium to account for the increase in payments . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and today 's question : Is a deferred income annuity a good idea ? Well , a lot of people like to buy and shop for blocks of income . You can actually go out and figure out what kind of income you 're going to need to subsidize your basic domestic expenses during retirement . A deferred income annuity will be able to give you a block of income . It could be for a time certain . It could be for the rest of your life . It depends upon your time line and what you 're looking for . But you 'll be surprised that most of the people that buy deferred income annuities also buy an inflation rider , a cost-of-living rider , to it so that every year there 's an adjustment made for your income : a block of income that you purchased , plus it goes up , let 's say , 3 % every year annually . And if you buy a lifetime DIA , that premium will go up every year , all the way out until the last day that you live . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
That is a great question ! I 'm pleased to hear you ask it , as it is really important to understand the risks of investing before you make that investment . The good thing about a fixed annuity is that you know exactly what your return will be . The risk lies in what if that interest rate you will receive does not keep up with inflation over the life of the annuity ? Inflation is best described in the amount of rising costs you pay for everyday things . If your annuity pays 1 % , but the price of milk and gas goes up 3 % , yes , you will have an increase of 1 % in your annuity value , but it will only pay for 98 % of what it would buy today . You would in effect be losing 2 cents on every dollar you put into the annuity . It is important to work with a good advisor , who can help you find an annuity that will give you a rate that is sufficient , or that provides built in adjustments . If you need help , please feel free to drop me a line , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
annuities
What Does A Fixed Annuity Cost ?
In short , it depends on the size of the annuity -LRB- how much you want to put it in -RRB- . If you want to buy an immediate annuity , you 're paying a sum of money to the insurance company in one payment and you 're done - you start receiving annuity payments immediately . If you want to buy a deferred annuity , you are paying premiums to the carrier throughout a given number of periods - you start receiving annuity payments at a future point in time . The advantage being that the monies put into the annuity grow tax-deferred . What you get out of the annuity will vary a lot as well because each carrier that offers annuities will offer different interest rates so one company may offer a large payout to you than another even though you 're putting in the same amount of money either way . This is where an independent annuity broker comes in handy because they can work with you on a personal level , compare options from multiple carriers to see which will offer you the best payout , and get your annuity set up - plus , brokers do not charge fees for their services so you can only help yourself . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
Fixed annuities can definitely be a great idea for seniors . The set payout creates a known , predictable income stream that helps supplement a senior 's other retirement income . They are low-risk and generate a guaranteed interest rate return . There are immediate and deferred fixed annuities and they are set up through insurance companies . If you 're already at the retirement age , you may want to consider an immediate annuity . If you 're in younger years , then a deferred annuity may be more preferable . An immediate fixed annuity makes fixed payments starting when the annuity is established that are determined by your age and the size of your annuity -LRB- how much money you put into it -RRB- . A deferred annuity accumulates over time . If you would like to look into fixed annuities in further detail and see what interest rates are available in today 's market from a number of different carriers , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name . I have an agent in my office that has a strong background in fixed annuities and can help get your program set up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
Fixed Index Annuities -LRB- FIA 's -RRB- are annuities that have the security of a guaranteed interest rate along with the potential to earn more based on the performance of a market index or indexes . Fixed Index Annuities are often interchanged with the term Equity Indexed Annuities , but FIA 's can be tied to indexes other than the stock market . The premium for a Fixed Index Annuity can go in as a simply payment or be paid over time . The potential for growth in an Indexed Annuity is greater than a Fixed Annuity due to the participation in the indexes . However , it maintains the security of the guaranteed interest rate of a Fixed Annuity .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
What are the differences between fixed and variable annuities ? Well , the biggest difference would be the investment pool you work from . A fixed annuity investment choices are made by the insurance company and you receive a stated % return for that year . You do n't have to do anything . A variable annuity shifts the investment risk onto the individual and they , not the insurance company -LRB- to a degree -RRB- decide what the annuity will be invested in . The Risk shifts to the insured and while the possibility exists to outgain the fixed annuity , the possibility of loss , even loss of existing balance exists . A variable annuity REQUIRES attention to a much great degree than a fixed .
Indexed annuities are different from other fixed annuities because of the way it credits interest to your annuity 's value . Some fixed annuities only credit interest calculated at a rate set in the contract . Other fixed annuities also credit interest at rates set from time to time by the insurance company . Indexed Annuities credit interest using a formula based on changes in the index to which the fixed indexed annuity is linked . The formula decides how the additional interest , if any , is calculated and credited . How much additional interest you get and when you get it depends on the features of your particular contract ?
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Yes , ING does sell annuities . They have a complete portfolio of annuities including : Fixed Annuities - a type of annuity that will pay you a fixed rate of return . Indexed Annuities - an annuity that credits interest based on the performance of an index . Immediate Annuities - this annuity is for someone with a lump sum of money who is interested in immediately turning that amount of money into a guaranteed income stream . Annuities are an important retirement planning vehicle with tax deferral , death benefit , and optional living benefits .
Fixed annuities invest your premium into conservative , long term securities -LRB- usually bonds -RRB- chosen by the company . These steady investments allow the company to guarantee you fixed payments later on . Your payments are also guaranteed to last a number of years or a lifetime , determined in advance . Variable annuities are invested in stocks and more risky investments which the annuity holders choose themselves . They may have some guaranteed elements , but also have the potential to pay more than a fixed annuity , or less than a fixed annuity , due to that element of risk .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are a wide variety of annuities . Generally , the cost of owning a fixed annuity is the cost of the deposit . Generally , the cost of owning a variable annuity is the initial deposit and internal fees that are declared when the product is purchased . Fixed annuities rarely have maintenance fees . Most annuities have a minimum premium .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Where To Find Individual Health Insurance ?
From me , of course . If you are like most Americans shopping for health insurance is not only about as exciting as watching paint dry but you also find yourself in a world you do n't fully understand and where the people seem to speak a foreign language . Of course , you can always go online and shop around or , even more fun , go to HealthCare.Gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace and shop there . That works for some people but millions of others have learned the painful lesson that there are a lot of factors to consider when making a purchase as important as health insurance that are very difficult to present concisely on a web site . Seek out the services of a qualified life and health insurance agent . An independent agent not tied to one specific insurance company can shop the entire marketplace for you and can be impartial . An agent with additional professional certifications such as Chartered Benefits Consultant , Certified Employee Benefits Consultant , Registered Health Underwriter are examples of professionals who have taken their education and training beyond the simple requirements to get a life and health insurance license . These are the characteristics I would recommend you look for in a health insurance agent . It does n't cost you anything extra to get these professional 's services and they do all the work , can answer your questions , and point out those not so obvious issues with provider networks , how your specific medical and/or prescription needs are covered by different plans that the average consumer often misses or does n't even know to ask about . ObamaCare has not made all health insurance policies equal , quite the opposite in fact . Ask your friends or co-workers , do an Internet search for health insurance agents , or contact me . But you 'll be glad that you got professional guidance on this matter .
Not much really . On an individual life policy there is n't an issue of portability as the individual owns the policy and the policy goes where ever the individual goes . With a group policy , there usually is a provision that allows an individual the opportunity to `` convert '' their group policy to an individual policy and have it become their personal property . Where this may be important is if the individual has serious health conditions and the carve out of an individual plan out of the group plan makes sense in terms of cost or even availability .
With the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- that became effective January 1 , 2014 , the differences in what group and individual health insurance cover are virtually nonexistent . The removal of underwriting , pre-existing condition exclusions and/or limitations and the addition of guaranteed issue and maternity coverage to both policy types has furthered leveled the playing field between group health and individual health insurance products . The crucial advantage group health plans continue to enjoy versus their individual market counterparts are tax issue related . What an employer contributes towards the health insurance coverage of their employees is a deductible business expense and in some small group cases may even qualify for a tax credit . In addition , employees can pay for their share of group health premiums using pre-tax dollars under a Section 125 Plan . Pre-tax treatment of employee contributions not only saves employee 's money , it reduces net taxable payroll which in turn lowers employer FICA matching expenses which is a further tax savings . For most individuals who purchase and pay for individual health insurance on their own there are none of these associated tax benefits . That is not to say that some individuals can not structure their business affairs to get some tax advantages in the individual marketplace but , after the ACA , our system is now set up to continue to tax favor group policies versus individual policies and to tax favor individual health insurance policies via subsidies up to certain income levels up to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
No . A health insurance company must provide a policyholder with proper advance notice of any policy cancellation . You should receive a written notification from your insurance carrier of their intent to cancel coverage , an explanation for the cancellation and the date that the policy will be terminated . Cancelling an individual or group health insurance policy is not something an insurance carrier can do arbitrarily and could get them in big trouble with the state insurance department and possibly the Federal government . Now , if you engaged in fraud in applying for a health insurance policy the insurance carrier is within their rights to cancel your policy and may even cancel it retroactively to the date of issuance . But they would still have to provide you with notice , an explanation and a chance to appeal the decision . An example that we will probably see more of in the era of ObamaCare where health insurance rates can be significantly different from one side of a state line to another is the situation where a person enrolls for coverage stating that they are a resident of a state like Tennessee -LRB- where more health insurance options exist and rates are lower -RRB- when they are really a resident of Arkansas -LRB- where choices are limited and rates are higher -RRB- . It is also possible that an insurance carrier will cancel an insurance policy product line , withdraw from a marketplace or go out of business , all of which are situations where an insurance carrier cancellation would be initiated by the insurance company . However , they are still required to provide policyholders with timely notice even in these events .
This is a very important question , especially in the individual health insurance marketplace after January 1 , 2014 . Individual insurance carriers have revamped their products significantly to compete in this new environment and the consumer needs to be well informed when making their choice as the answer to your question will vary significantly from one insurance carrier 's products to another 's . As a general rule of thumb , you can be pretty comfortable that in a life threatening emergency your insurance coverage will apply outside of your home state . Where things can get confusing and possibly expensive is when a subscriber seeks non-emergency care outside of their home state or perhaps even outside of their plan 's service area within their home state . Before enrolling in a plan you need to know if it has moved to an HMO type of model where you may have little or no coverage outside of your plan 's service area -LRB- this could literally be an area encompassing several counties within your state -RRB- , whether the plan has gone to a gatekeeper model where a referral from your primary care physician is required for treatment to be covered at in-network levels , or whether your chosen carrier uses an open network model where you can access their provider network any where in the nation without a referral being required . My advice is to seek out the guidance of an experienced health insurance broker who understands how different health insurance carriers have structured their products and who can educate and guide you to the plan that best fits your needs . Please feel free to contact me for assistance in this regard .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
According to an analysis released in March of 2014 the national average cost of a Silver level -LRB- 70 % actuarial value coverage -RRB- individual health insurance plan is $ 328 . This is where the `` and your results may vary '' disclaimer comes in . Individual health insurance costs vary significantly from one state to another and can vary significantly within different areas of any given state . The costs will vary from one health insurance carrier to another and they will definitely vary from one level of coverage to another -LRB- Bronze , Silver , Gold or Platinum levels -RRB- . Taking all the factors I just listed into account , your age and whether or not you use tobacco products will be the determining factors in determining the gross cost of an individual health insurance policy for you specifically . Finally , whether or not you fall into an income range that may qualify you for an advanced premium tax subsidy if you purchase health insurance through your state 's health insurance marketplace or HealthCare.gov will determine what your final net cost of individual health insurance will be .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
Applying for individual health insurance under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is no longer something a person is necessarily free to do whenever they choose . In the largest sense , ObamaCare envisions the overwhelming number of individual health insurance enrollments to occur during the designated annual open enrollment period . This year the open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 . So , depending upon your personal circumstances you may not even be able to apply for individual health insurance until then for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . If you have experienced a change of life status event during this year -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , loss of employer based coverage , aging off of parent 's plan -RRB- then you have 60-days after that event to enroll in individual health insurance coverage . It sounds like you would be well served to seek the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you determine if you might qualify for any premium subsidy and whether your health insurance needs would best be met by insurance carriers and products either inside the government health insurance marketplaces or in the traditional health insurance marketplace . Of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov or check out some other Internet based insurance shopping services but I do raise a note of caution about this to the normal health insurance consumer . The health care reform law has made understanding and comparing health insurance benefits , coverage and provider networks more complicated than ever and it is an environment that is still evolving . Getting some professional guidance is n't going to cost you anymore and it will provide you the assurance that you understand what you are buying and why .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
Of course you can , it 's called paying for it yourself . And actually that 's how most Americans paid for their health care -LRB- such as it was -RRB- for most of our nation 's history . Of course today most Americans have grown up in an environment where all of their health care financing has been funneled through a third party such as a health insurance company or a government program and have been disconnected from the concept of directly paying for health care services . Many would argue this is one of the underlying causes of the problems our nation is experiencing with health care costs today . Your doctor would be thrilled to be paid in cash , check or credit card for your office visit and not have to file a claim with an insurance carrier or government agency . In fact , you might find out you would get a discounted charge for paying in cash . An example of this is the growing `` concierge medical practice '' movement where people prepay their physician a fee for access to the doctor 's services . You get your phone calls returned promptly and when you go in to see your doctor he actually spends more than 5 to 10-minutes with you . What a revolutionary idea ! The hospital ca n't turn you away when you have an emergency and must deliver care . However , this does n't relieve you of the financial responsibility for the services you receive and they will bill you and pursue payment . This is obviously the area where the greatest concern for individual health financial risk management comes up . Unless you are very wealthy , self-financing several years of cancer treatment or paying for a heart transplant is out of the question for most people . Even managing a chronic health problem like diabetes , COPD , or psoriatic arthritis can have the person using medications costing hundreds or thousands of dollars per month . So , yes , you can still get medical treatment without health insurance and for many routine health care needs self-financing would probably be more cost effective . However , for the high risk and chronic health conditions a person may be faced with insurance is really a necessity .
Health insurance issuers -LRB- i.e. , licensed entities -RRB- in the individual and small group markets must consider all enrollees in all non-grandfathered health plans issued in a particular state to be members of a single risk pool when developing rates and premiums for plan years -LRB- in the individual market , policy years -RRB- effective on or after Jan. 1 , 2014 . Each issuer must have one individual market pool and one small group market pool in each applicable state . States may choose to require issuers merge these pools . The final rule also requires : Each issuer in a state will have an index rate for each of the individual and small group pools for each plan year -LRB- policy year , in the individual market -RRB- . The index rate is based on the total combined claims costs for providing essential health benefits within the single risk pool . If there is not enough claims data available , issuers may use any reasonable source of claims data , including claims from grandfathered business . There may be market-wide adjustments for risk adjustment and reinsurance programs as well as Exchange user fees . Premium rates for a particular plan may vary from the market-wide index rate only by several enumerated factors . For example , issuers may modify the market-wide index rate at the individual plan level to adjust for administrative costs -LRB- other than Exchange user fees -RRB- , so long as actuarially justified . Plan-specific adjustments to the market-wide index rate must not reflect differences in health status or risk selection . Issuers are expected to use pooled allowable claims data as a basis for calculating the plan-specific actuarial value instead of using the HHS actuarial value calculator . Fair Health Insurance Premiums -LRB- applies to non-grandfathered plans -RRB- - Health insurance issuers may vary the premium rate charged to a specific non-grandfathered individual or small group from the rate established for that particular plan only based on the following factors : family size -LRB- individual or family -RRB- , geography -LRB- rating area -RRB- , age -LRB- within a ratio of 3:1 for adults -RRB- and tobacco use -LRB- within a ratio of 1.5:1 -RRB- .
YES , in the aggregate sense . Perhaps for some individuals or groups their particular situation will allow them to benefit from the changes in rating methods and benefits required by the Affordable Care Act . But for most individuals and groups I am entirely comfortable in predicting higher health insurance costs . First of all , the underlying cost of health care services continues to rise . As these costs rise the cost of insuring these services must rise accordingly , this has been the case throughout my 30 years in the health insurance industry . Secondly , we are beginning to get a picture of what the enrollment composition in the individual health insurance marketplaces is looking like . As predicted by many industry professionals , the enrollment is skewing towards an older and sicker population with the highly desired young and healthy population largely remaining on the sidelines . Just today one of nation 's largest pharmacy management companies reported their preliminary analysis of the prescription utilization of marketplace enrollees vs their pre-health care reform population . Usage of expensive prescription medications for serious chronic health problems is 47 % higher , and this is just based on a couple of months of utilization data ! While some hold out the hope that the people who waited until the last moment to enroll were disproportionately young and healthy , my own experience enrolling people gives little indication that this was the case . So , the table has been set for adverse selection -LRB- more sick than healthy enrollees -RRB- in the health insurance pool , especially for the insurance carriers who elected to participate in the government health insurance marketplaces . This can not help but translate into higher health insurance costs for 2015 and in many areas of the country this will translate into very significant double digit increases in individual and small group health insurance . This has already been broadly hinted at by all the major health insurance carriers , it 's really not a question of `` if '' but just `` how much '' .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
Health Insurance Premiums can only be paid for with funds from a Health Savings Account under certain circumstances . The situations where Health Insurance premiums can be paid by a qualified distributions from a HSA is when an individual is over age 65 and paying for Medicare , when an individual is being covered by COBRA health care continuation coverage , and health care coverage while an individual is recieving unemployment compensation . That being said , one should try to avoid using their HSA for such purposes unless absolutely necessary . Your HSA is earning compound interest on the funds in your account , and at age 65 you will be able to start recieving distributions from the account in almost the exact manner as if it were an IRA . Given the benefits of having a duel health care expense/retirement fund that has a `` healthy '' ballance , one should try to minimize unnecessary distributions .
Purchasing health insurance for an LLC is no different than applying for an individual or group health insurance plan . If the LLC has few or one one employee then individual policies would make the most financial sense . If the LLC wants to provide benefits for all its employees then either a small group plan or a defined benefit plan will make sense . Group 's plans require an in depth fact finding analysis to uncover the true needs of the group . Important factors include : Size of the group Number of employee participating Amount employer wants to subsidize - if any ? Type of benefits Are employees local or spread out among states The new trend in 2014 for small group is setting up a defined contribution plan -LRB- section 105 plan -RRB- where the employer subsidizes a set amount to employees tax-free and the employees use that money to offset their health insurance premium , costs etc for the individual plans they purchase .
It used to mean that for an individual applying for individual health insurance or for an employer group applying for group health insurance that the individual or the employees would have to answer medical questions and perhaps provide rather detailed information on any pre-existing health conditions that they or their dependents to be covered might have . This has essentially become a non-issue in the fully insured individual or group health insurance markets after January 1 , 2o14 as the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- no longer allows for the underwriting of such health insurance policies . Underwriting may still be encountered in the group health insurance market if an employer has or is implementing a self-funded health insurance plan . As these plans are subject to the Federal ERISA guidelines asking medical questions and adjusting a group 's rates for the medical risk -LRB- s -RRB- in the group is still allowed .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Is The Average Homeowners Insurance Cost Per Month ?
Your cost for homeowners insurance is as unique as the home that you own . There are many factors that are taken into consideration when your premium is determined from an insurance carrier . Based on my experience within my geographic area I would say the average homeowners insurance cost is about eight hundred to fifteen hundred dollars per year . Call a local agent a quote will cost you nothing butyour time .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
The premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 per month in 2014 -LRB- this number can change each year -RRB- . The premium can be higher for individuals whose incomes are in the following brackets : If filing an individual tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- 107,001 - $ 160,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- 160,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a joint tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a married & separate tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 = $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If you want to review Medicare supplements to help cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- , contact an independent agent/broker to review Medicare supplement plans available in your zip code . If you would like assistance with your Medicare supplement program or have any other questions , you can send me a private message through the `` contact me '' button .
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month -LRB- translating to $ 3,936 per year -RRB- - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . You may also have options for group coverage through your employer.It 's important to compare these factors - I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost per person in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . You may also have options for group coverage through your employer . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The average cost per person in the country for a health insurance plan is estimated to be about $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to an individual as compared to the overall group . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . This is where an independent insurance agent can really help you . They can work with you to look at a wide range of options from many of the top carriers in the industry and find the plan that 's going to be best suitable for your needs .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much a specific individual should be paying for health insurance is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , each individual health plan is guaranteed-issue , meaning you can not be declined for health insurance for a pre-existing condition or other health-related issue , nor charged a higher amount -LRB- e.g. level 1 rates , level 2 rates , level 3 rates , etc. as it was under the old structures -RRB- . If you 're an individual buying on or off the exchange -LRB- and not securing group coverage through an employer -RRB- , you need to consider the level plan you want . There are four metal plans : bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Bronze plans generally cover about 60 % of your healthcare expenses , Silver is 70 % , Gold is 80 % , and Platinum is 90 % . So , in short , the better the benefits that you want to have , the higher the premium will be . There 's also a catastrophic plan , but these are only available to individuals under age 30 . Your premiums are now based on the type of plan you have , your zip code , whether you use tobacco products or not , and your age - premiums will vary by carrier . You may also have a subsidy available to you to reduce the cost of your health insurance premium . There are many factors that go into the pricing of a product for a specific area . Everyone 's tolerance for cost is different as well . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker to help you determine the plan that 's going to be suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan -LRB- overall -RRB- is estimated to be about $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to an individual as compared to the overall group . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Whether you are covered under an individual health plan or group coverage will influence what you 're paying . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age and zip codes are big factors as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker regarding your personal health coverage . We can work with you to look at a wide range of options from many of the top carriers in the industry and find the plan that 's going to be best suitable for your needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . This is where an independent insurance agent can really help you . They can work with you to look at a wide range of options from many of the top carriers in the industry and find the plan that 's going to be best suitable for your needs .
The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan -LRB- overall -RRB- is estimated to be about $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to an individual as compared to the overall group . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age and zip codes are big factors as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker regarding your personal health coverage . We can work with you to look at a wide range of options from many of the top carriers in the industry and find the plan that 's going to be best suitable for your needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The answer to this question can vary dramatically , depending on your age , residence , and the type of coverage you purchase . It is common to see statistics on this topic that vary dramatically , with a low `` average '' cost in the $ 300 per person per month range , while other surveys show cost averaging $ 1000 a month or more per person .
The most recent figures for late March , 2014 indicate that the average cost of an individual major medical health insurance policy in the United States is $ 328 per month . That said , your results can and almost certainly will vary . A national average figure is not likely to be reflective of what the cost would be for you in the specific area of the state that you are a resident in . Also , this average figure does not take into account any possible advanced premium tax subsidy a person might qualify for , which would reduce that person 's net cost of insurance . Individual health insurance rates can vary wildly from one state to another and can vary significantly within the various regions that each state is subdivided into under the structure imposed by the Affordable Care Act . And the reported national average price becomes an even more unreliable yardstick because it also averages in a wide range of levels of insurance coverage . As an analogy , you can get an average cost for a new car purchase in the U.S. but that may bear little resemblance to the price of the specific car you want to buy .
For most individuals , Medicare Part A will be premium-free . This happens if you 've hit your 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life and paying FICA taxes . If you do n't hit this , the premium will be up to $ 426 per month . In 2014 , Individuals with Medicare Part B will pay anywhere from the minimum $ 104.90 per month -LRB- this is most individuals -RRB- , up to the maximum of $ 335.70 per month , depending on your income level -LRB- individuals with higher incomes pay a higher premium due to the high-income penalty on Part B premium calculations -RRB- . So for those with only Parts A & B , the `` average '' person will likely be paying $ 104.90 per month between the two . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan , you will have additional premium expenses -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is Voluntary Deductible In Car Insurance ?
It appears to be a policy provision found in auto and property insurance policies issued in India . The provision allows the insured to set the amount of a loss that they will bear themselves -LRB- deductible -RRB- at the time of claim . This then sets a percentage that affects the premium for the coverage . The higher the percentage bore by the insured , the lower the premium .
Voluntary term life is a group product where participation is not mandatory . An employee can choose to purchase voluntary life , usually through payroll deduction . Depending on the plan , voluntary can be a guaranteed issue or simple underwriting plan . Guaranteed Issue would just be signing up and paying the premium and Simplified Issue might involve answering a few questions . Either way , most will pay more in price for these plans . Simple rule of thumb with insurance , the fewer questions , the higher the cost . If you 're a fit person , in good shape and health , a voluntary payroll plan gives you some convenience , but not any cost savings .
What is voluntary life insurance ? Voluntary life insurance is usually something you 'll find in the workplace offered through your employer 's HR office . The voluntary means it 's an optional benefit choice for an employee . Usually voluntary life is sold on a guaranteed basis with little to no underwriting . Again since the few questions , the higher the cost or the lower the benefit .
Usually the term `` Voluntary '' life insurance refers to a policy which may be purchased through your place of employment . Generally `` Voluntary '' life insurance is purchased through a group contract made between your employer and the insurance company . `` Voluntary '' life insurance can be a very good purchase as some companies will relax their underwriting requirements for those who participate and some insurance companies will even offer guarenteed issue type policies for those employees that participate . One of the other benefits of these policies is that they may be able to have the premiums deducted from your pay check according to how you are paid -LRB- weekly , bi-weekly , monthly , etc -RRB- . Other than how they are purchased `` Voluntary '' life policies are the same as any other life policy that you can by , in that they allow you to own the policy and assign beneficiaries as you desire . In most cases , if you leave your employment you may continue your policy by paying the monthly premiums from your bank account as they come due . I would caution though , that you should talk to the insurance company representative , when they come to enroll the group or service the account , as some policies may have different rules than others .
What is voluntary term life insurance ? Usually it is a program offered through your employer to provide employees with an opportunity to purchase life insurance through work and payroll deduction . In some cases , voluntary group life offers life coverage at a higher cost , but with fewer health questions and no lab testing . The thing to keep in mind when considering life insurance is the more questions they can ask , the cheaper the cost will be for a healthy person . That does n't mean Voluntary life is bad , it means you may find coverage cheaper elsewhere .
Technically there are n't voluntary health insurance plans but there are voluntary insurance plans that are designed to supplement your existing health insurance plan . Voluntary benefit plans are one of the few growth areas in the health insurance market space and we are seeing new products being introduced and new insurance companies entering this arena on a regular basis these days . Generally , when people are talking about supplementary health plans they are referring to insurance policies that address specific issues such as ; 1 -RRB- Accident insurance - makes a payment to the policyholder when the experience a covered accident like falling and breaking your arm . 2 -RRB- Hospital Indemnity - these policies usually pay a fixed dollar amount per day or per admission for a hospitalization . These policies may also provide fixed dollar benefits for a certain number of doctor 's office visits , urgent care/minor medial or emergency room visits . 3 -RRB- Critical Illness - these policies pay a fixed amount upon the diagnosis of certain specified illnesses such as heart attacks & strokes , organ transplants , cancer , kidney failure . The illnesses covered and the benefit amount will vary from one supplementary insurance carrier to another and from policy to policy . 4 -RRB- Cancer - these policies specifically address the diagnosis and treatment of various types of cancer . 5 -RRB- GAP Plans - plans designed to cover the financial exposure of having a high deductible health insurance plan . There are other variations on the theme and , as stated earlier , this is an area where new products are constantly being introduced . While this trend has been going on for a while , it has certainly been accelerated with passage of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- and the need to address the movement towards higher deductible plans that shift more cost onto the insured person .
As stated , voluntary Term is offered on group policies and is voluntary , meaning you do not have to take it . Term insurance means that it is only offered for a specific period . Never rely on voluntary term as your whole insurance package . This only covers you while you are employed . That is why it is called term insurance . Some contracts will allow you to convert it to a permanent policy if you leave your job but that would be at a much higher rate . Most however do not offer that option . Some individual health policies also offer voluntary term insurance . This covers you while you have that policy but you lose it if you change insurance companies . You are better off in most cases to purchase insurance on your own .
Employee life insurance usually refers to a group term life insurance plan provided as a benefit for employees of a company . But employee life insurance can also include voluntary plans and business life insurance policies such as those used in conjunction with a non-qualified deferred compensation agreement . In some cases the employer pays all or part of the premium . Voluntary life premiums are normally paid by the employee . Group term life plans and voluntary insurance allow the employee to name the beneficiary . Business life insurance plans usually have the employer as the beneficiary .
What is voluntary short term disability insurance ? Probably something offered through payroll deduction by your employer to provide extra income protection for their employees . STDI is paycheck protection in case of illness or off the clock injury that would n't be covered by worker 's comp . This is for those broken legs skiing or sliding into second . Those weeks of chemo when you 're too sick to work . Voluntary means it is up to you how valuable this coverage is .
Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance is a group disability insurance plan offered to employees at group rates . It is usually provided through payroll deductions . Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance will pay a portion of the employee 's salary to them in cash if the employee is disabled due to illness or injury .
Voluntary Term Life Insurance is a provision of group life insurance , where the employee may purchase additional coverage beyond what the employer provides . Voluntary Term Life Insurance can also extend to the spouse or dependents of the employee . The employee is able to purchase the additional coverage at group rates .
Medicare Supplemental Insurance though voluntary , in my professional opinion , is needed to pay the many dollars Medicare Part A and B do not cover . Many people do n't realize the Part A deductible of $ 1216 in 2014 is a per hospitalization benefit period deductible and not a per calendar year deductible as is the Part B deductible . The Part B coinsurance on Part B has no stop loss , resulting in an unlimited liability .
what is a voluntary disability plan ? These are plans offered through your employer that can very much be worthwhile to the employees of a company . Underwriting is usually lighter , cost is competitive and for the more blue collar occupations , a voluntary group disability plan is a great idea as it is very difficult to get disability on your own with a blue collar occupation .
Over the years , like many things relating to Insurance Coverage , deductibles have generally increased . In many areas , home construction values have increased and the voluntary increasing of a deductible is a very sound way to help manage related premium increases . It is also true that many companies are making policy decisions to reduce the number of deductible choices available . In those case , lately I have been seeing that the average deductible isa $ 1000 . They can certainly go up from there , but check with your INsurance Professional to see if the increase reflects enough of a premium cost savings for you .
Voluntary Term Life Insurance is offered to employees who have some life insurance provided to them by their employers , and their employers are giving them the opportunity to purchase additional life insurance coverage at group rates . Employer provided life insurance is not taxable to $ 50,000 whereas voluntary life insurance purchased beyond that amount will be a taxable to the employee .
Oftentimes , your employer will pay for you to receive a certain amount of life insurance , then give you the option to purchase more coverage beyond that amount . The amount that you pay for on your own is called `` voluntary life insurance '' . If your employer does not pay for any of your life insurance , the entire amount that you purchase would be voluntary life insurance .
If you happen to live in a state where it is mandatory that your car policy includes coverage for primary medical benefits , then that portion of the claim must be handled by your car insurance company first . Once those benefits are exhausted , the claim may then be turned over to your medical insurance provider . States where such coverage is voluntary as opposed to mandated , if you choose to carry medical coverage on your car policy , it would work exactly the same way .
Voluntary life insurance is life insurance offered at the place employment that employees -LRB- or employees ' family members -RRB- purchase out of their own pockets . The premiums for voluntary life insurance are not paid by the employer . A certain amount of coverage is guaranteed issue for the employee ; beyond that amount health questions must be answered . Family members usually need to qualify medically .
Voluntary Life Insurance is offered by employers . It is group coverage available to the employees and their families that they can purchase on a voluntary basis , above the amount that their employer provides for them . For tax purposes , any amount of group life insurance coverage above $ 50,000 is a taxable benefit .
A state approved voluntary plan for Disability Insurance is offered by the State of California . Employers in California may use the State Plan or a Voluntary Plan to cover their employees . Contact the Employment Development Dept for the State of California for details and options for your Disability coverage .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Pay For Liposuction ?
Medicare does not cover liposuction as its considered a cosmetic procedure , even if you have an underlying medical condition related to weight . Some bariatric surgeries may be covered depending on medical necessity , such as a gastric bypass or gastric banding . If youre unsure whether your specific circumstances for a procedure would be covered by Medicare , you can contact Medicare directly to find out if the procedure would be covered . When procedures are covered by Medicare , they typically only pay for about 80 % of the covered healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . If you do not have one in place already , I would suggest considering the purchase of one . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare only pays for procedures that are necessary to preserve the health or life of the patient . Medicare does not pay for surgery , medication , procedures , or treatments that are solely for cosmetic purposes . Thus , Medicare does not pay for liposuction as it is used for cosmetic vs medical purposes .
Liposuction is normally a cosmetic procedure . Major medical plans , including those offered through Cigna , typically only provide coverage for procedures that are considered to be medically necessary . If your doctor can convince the carrier that liposuction is necessary for your overall well being , there is a chance the procedure could be covered ... but I would not count on it ...
Medicare does not cover liposuction as its considered a cosmetic procedure , even if you have an underlying medical condition related to weight . Some bariatric surgeries may be covered depending on medical necessity , such as a gastric bypass or gastric banding . If youre unsure whether your specific circumstances for a procedure would be covered by Medicare , you can contact Medicare directly to find out if the procedure would be covered . When procedures are covered by Medicare , they typically only pay for about 80 % of the covered healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . If you do not have one in place already , I would suggest considering the purchase of one . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
Liposuction is generally considered an elective procedure and therefore not covered by health insurance . I personally have n't come across a health insurance program that offers coverage for that specific procedure . I 'd suggest reviewing your policy for a definitive answer or contacting the agent on your policy . Hope that helps !
Liposuction is typically completed as an elective procedure and not medically necessary - therefore the procedure would not be covered by a health insurance plan . It 's always helpful to contact the carrier to find out if a specific service would be covered or not if you 're not sure . They would be able to give a definitive answer to your specific situation . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance or if you have other questions . Thanks very much .
A medical exam for the coverage typically consists of a paramedical exam -LRB- height/weight check and vitals checks such as pulse and blood pressure readings -RRB- , a blood test , and a urine test - sometimes an EKG and/or cognitive testing may be required for older age individuals -RRB- . Even if it 's not asked specifically on the application itself , the carrier will see the input regarding the wls -LRB- I 'm assuming stands for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- surgery in the APS from your doctor . For any fully underwritten life insurance program , the carrier will request a copy of an APS from your doctor , in addition to the completion of a medical exam conducted for the insurance policy -RRB- . An APS is an Attending Physician Statement - in short , it 's a doctor 's summary of your medical history records . For example , if you were being treated for diabetes , it would cite your A1C reading history , prescriptions prescribed for the condition , when it was diagnosed , etc. . In the APS , the carrier will see in the doctor 's notes that you have discussed getting the wls surgery -LRB- I 'm assuming that `` wls '' is supposed to stand for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- and ask if a surgery has been scheduled and/or completed . If it has n't been completed yet , a carrier will postpone approving you for the coverage because you have an outstanding medical procedure on the books that 's still supposed to get done . From a carrier 's perspective , their risk of a claim is greatly increased when they know a surgical operation is upcoming as complications can always occur during any surgery . Please note , after a weight loss surgery procedure and you 've ideally lost a large amount of weight and want to apply for coverage , part of that weight loss can be added in to a carrier 's calculation of height/weight profile . The reason for this is quick weight loss for people -LRB- whether via surgery , diet and exercise , liposuction , etc. -RRB- can often result in some individuals gaining a percentage of that weight back - unfortunately not everyone always keeps all of the pounds off . So if you apply for coverage within 12 months of that rapid weight loss , a carrier may add half the weight loss amount back to your total . For example , if you weight 300 pounds and loss 120 pounds after a procedure , now you 're sitting at 180 pounds . If you applied for coverage soon after having lost that 120 pounds , the carrier would add 60 back to your total and base the underwriting on a height/weight profile of 240 pounds -LRB- 180 +60 -RRB- . The purpose of the 12 month differential is to show stability in the person 's weight loss and that they have a good chance of keeping off the weight . Please also note , alternative options will still result in the same outcome -LRB- e.g. non-medical life insurance -RRB- because a question on almost every application will ask in some format `` are there any outstanding tests or other medical procedures outstanding or waiting to be completed '' . You would only be able to secure a graded policy with a low face amount -LRB- $ 25k or $ 50k maximum -RRB- , which does not appear to be in the ballpark of the coverage you 're looking to secure -LRB- you noted $ 900k in your question 's statement -RRB- . If you have a policy already in force , you can elect to convert all or a portion of it to permanent coverage . The conversion would keep the risk class that the original policy had and would simply just calculate the rates based on your age . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare only pays for procedures that are necessary to preserve the health or life of the patient . Medicare does not pay for surgery , medication , procedures , or treatments that are solely for cosmetic purposes . Thus , Medicare does not pay for liposuction as it is used for cosmetic vs medical purposes .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Having two health insurance programs generally happens when a person is eligible/signed up for Medicare Part A -LRB- premium-free -RRB- , but is still working and has group health insurance coverage through their employer . When this happens and the group coverage pays first and Medicare pays second , the group coverage will pay its share and whatever the balance is will go through the Medicare 's claims department - Medicare will pay their share up to the Medicare-approved amount . You will be responsible for paying any remaining balance after that . Most of the time if you 're paying for Medicare Part B , you 're not going to be paying for group coverage as well - you would either have group coverage + Medicare Part A or Medicare Part A + Part B . If you 're on Medicare Parts A & B , I highly recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy to help cover the gaps in coverage provided by Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- .
When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
In short , Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . Excess charges falls under what a doctor can bill you for . If you read an outline of coverage of a plan F or a plan G -LRB- whichever carrier 's outline you want to look at does n't matter - the plans are standardized so the input is the same regardless of company -RRB- , you will see that Medicare Part A pays all but specified amounts during a hospital stay -LRB- as an inpatient -RRB- as follows : 1 -RRB- First 60 days - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 1,260 . Medigap plan F and G pay the deductible for you . 2 -RRB- Days 61-90 - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 315 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 315 a day for you -LRB- 30 days totals up to $ 9,450 -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Days 91 + -LRB- while using 60 lifetime reserve days -RRB- - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 630 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 630 a day -LRB- 60 reserve days totals up to $ 37,800 -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Once lifetime reserve days are used , additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . Medigap plan F and G pay 100 % of Medicare-eligible expenses up to an additional 365 days . 5 -RRB- Beyond the additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . * Note - that 's per benefit period ! A benefit period begins on the first day you receive services as an INPATIENT and ends after you 've been out of the hospital for at least 60 days in a row . It 's possible to have more than one benefit period in the span of a year . Inpatient stay coverage per benefit period includes semi-private room and board , general nursing , and miscellaneous services and supplies . Please also note , you can be in a hospital for a day or two and still be listed as an outpatient . If you 're unsure , you should ask your doctor if you 're listed as an inpatient or outpatient in their system . Unless you 're admitted as an inpatient , you 're being treated as an outpatient which is where your Medicare Part B coverage comes into play . Part B pays about 80 % of medical expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % -LRB- covered by plans F and G -RRB- . If a doctor accepts Medicare assignment , they accept the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full . If they do not accept Medicare assignment , they can bill you an excess charge - which are covered by plans F and G . If you live in Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , or Vermont , you can not be charged excess charges by a doctor due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medicare coinsurance is the amount you must pay after satisfying your Medicare Part A or Part B deductible . Medicare Part A has a per admission deductible -LRB- $ 1184 in 2013 -RRB- . After paying your deductible most hospital charges are covered by Medicare for the first 60 days . After that Medicare pays a portion and you pay the rest -LRB- coinsurance -RRB- . Medicare Part B also has a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- . After that , Medicare pays 80 % of approved plans and you pay the coinsurance , or the remaining 20 % .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Do I Meet My Health Insurance Deductible ?
Your health insurance deductible is the amount that the covered individual must pay out of their own pocket before the health insurance plan begins paying for covered health care expenses . Deductibles can vary from one insurance policy to another . As an example , let 's say you have a health insurance policy with a $ 2000 deductible followed by 100 % co-insurance coverage after that amount.You are thenhospitalized for heart surgery under this policy and the total bill is $ 50,000 . You would be 100 % financially responsible for the first $ 2000 of that bill -LRB- your deductible -RRB- and the health insurance carrier would pay the remaining $ 48,000 . You have `` met '' your deductible by incurring expenses in excess of your plan 's deductible . As many healthcare providers and hospitals will tell you , there is a difference in someone `` meeting '' their deductible and actually paying their deductible expenses . So , inour example , as long as the policy holder keeps paying their health insurance premiums their health insurance will remain in effect even if the policy holder pays none or only a portion of their $ 2000 deductible amount . This is why a growing number of consumers are receiving demands for upfront payment of their deductible and co-insurance cost sharing amounts from some healthcare providers before they will provide services . I just had a friend ask me about this very situation for one of her coworkers who had recently learned she was pregnant and who was told by their OB/GYN that they wanted payment for the person 's $ 1500 deductible and their 30 % co-insurance cost sharing for the OB/GYN to provide their services to that person .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
USAA is a highly rated insurance company and I am sure anything they offer will be of high quality but you need to make sure that policy meets your needs . How do you do that ? Sit down with your significant other and write down what it is that you want the policy to provide . Then call the company and say , I want a health insurance plan that will pay 80 % of all charges in the event I am hosiptialized with a $ 500 deductible . I want the policy to allow each member of my family to go the doctor up to 4 times a year and only have to pay a $ 30 copay . I want that policy to pay 80 % of any prescriptions that I or my family memebers need to purchase . Do you have a policy that meets my expectations and if so what do it cost ?
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
First , let me say I am not an accountant or tax expert at all . This questions would be best answered by a Certified Public Account or other tax pro . I can only speak to my personal situation . For years we did n't have a group plan through my company and I had individual/familycoverage that I paid for out of pocket . I also have family members who have some health issues that included specialists , a lot of RX drugs , etc. . Simply due to the cost of the health coverage , we had to go with a high deductible health plan as well . So , over the course of a year we would have our health premiums , high deductibles , plus a bunch of specialist costs that were not even covered by our insurance . This generated a ton of dollars that came out of my pocket personally . There is a threshold for medical expences -LRB- I do n't remember what it is -RRB- where anything over an above that figure is deductible on your tax return . I have been well over that figure every year for the last 5 or 6 , so I have been able to deduct a good amount of my out of pocket expence . This is just my personal situation and again , I am not a tax professional of any sort . All this was done on the advice of my personal accountant . I would highly recomend you contact a tax professional and discuss your individual situation with them .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Excellent question ! You essentially have 3 main variations on the theme when purchasing ObamaCare compliant major medical insurance ; 1 -RRB- Conventional plan designs with office visit & prescription copays and lower deductibles -LRB- pretty pricey these days -RRB- 2 -RRB- High deductible health insurance plans designed to work with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- or a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- - becoming more common . 3 -RRB- Plans that fall in between , here you may see a plan with office visit copays and a high deductible applying to everything else , plans with prescription copays and a high deductible applying to everything else , or plans with more moderate deductible levels with all services subject to the plan 's deductible and co-insurance requirements but that also do n't meet the IRS requirements for being an HSA eligible plan . Simple , right ? First , determine if the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use are in-network providers for the plan you are interested in . Second , review you health and your history of health care consumption . Your needs and usage at 27 will probably be much different than when you are 47 . Try to pick a plan that you believe will meet your needs in the coming year at the best value . Determine if the plan you are interested in allows for direct access to specialists or whether it requires you to be referred out by your primary care physician first . Neither approach is bad but you should understand how you are supposed to access care in order to maximize your benefits and minimize your costs . Ask what your coverage is when you are outside of your immediate area . Increasingly you may find that you only have emergency care outside of a plan 's `` service area '' or perhaps no coverage at all . Do you have special needs ? A chronic illness or injury that requires ongoing treatment or expensive prescription medication requires extra homework . For example , some health plan 's pharmacy benefits cover HIV/AIDS medications at the lowest level -LRB- to them , highest for you -RRB- possible . Finally , compare monthly premiums . The lowest monthly cost , while always attractive , many not really be the lowest annual cost for you once you factor in some or all of the issues I have pointed out above . It may be worth another $ 50 a month in premiums to have a prescription copay instead of a deductible of up to $ 6300 to meet before your expensive medication is covered .
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Health Insurance can be changed at anytime . The questions that you need to ask yourself before making these changes are : Has my health status changed since I applied for my current policy ? If so will there be exclusions on the new policy if I change . Does my policy offer deductible credits for not reaching the calendar year deductible ? The The consequences for making a mistake in regards to your health insurance plan could be very costly . Bring your current plan with you when you meet with a licensed Health Insurance Professional and compare the other offerings . Always get what your being told in writing .
As a big do it yourselfer , the answer is maybe ? It depends on what your situation is and how adept you are on gathering information and making a good decision from all the information out there . I mean I like to work on my cars and trucks . I can do many things myself and feel really good about it . However , I do still use my trusted mechanic for the things I simply am not good enough to do myself and that way I avoid putting my family at risk . As another noted , there are absolutely no price savings in going without an agent . The laws in most states prevent any discounting for doing it yourself . It never ever hurts to become informed about a product . I have taught my son the doctor , how to frame a house , wire a house and have a general understanding about construction . He 's a doctor now , and yes , that is fun to say , he has learned enough about how to build that when he decides to build , he can have a good conversation with a builder and know when to call shenanigans or not . By all means it pays to educate yourself , but understand that an open mind is required to educate yourself .
Your health insurance deductible is the amount that the covered individual must pay out of their own pocket before the health insurance plan begins paying for covered health care expenses . Deductibles can vary from one insurance policy to another . As an example , let 's say you have a health insurance policy with a $ 2000 deductible followed by 100 % co-insurance coverage after that amount.You are thenhospitalized for heart surgery under this policy and the total bill is $ 50,000 . You would be 100 % financially responsible for the first $ 2000 of that bill -LRB- your deductible -RRB- and the health insurance carrier would pay the remaining $ 48,000 . You have `` met '' your deductible by incurring expenses in excess of your plan 's deductible . As many healthcare providers and hospitals will tell you , there is a difference in someone `` meeting '' their deductible and actually paying their deductible expenses . So , inour example , as long as the policy holder keeps paying their health insurance premiums their health insurance will remain in effect even if the policy holder pays none or only a portion of their $ 2000 deductible amount . This is why a growing number of consumers are receiving demands for upfront payment of their deductible and co-insurance cost sharing amounts from some healthcare providers before they will provide services . I just had a friend ask me about this very situation for one of her coworkers who had recently learned she was pregnant and who was told by their OB/GYN that they wanted payment for the person 's $ 1500 deductible and their 30 % co-insurance cost sharing for the OB/GYN to provide their services to that person .
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Pay For Urgent Care ?
Generally Medicare does cover urgently needed care . However , without knowing the specifics of your treatment I can not give you a definitive answer . There are many different circumstances that will determine what treatments medicare will cover and what they wont cover . The best way to find out if a procedure will be covered is to contact medicare directly at 800-medicare or online at www.medicare.gov .
Does health insurance cover urgent care ? In most cases yes , but it will depend on the plan you have . Some plans cover urgent care very well to encourage it 's use over emergency room care . Urgent care was created to help reduce the excessive cost of people using emergency rooms for non emergency situations . More than likely your health plan provides favorable plan design for the use of urgent care .
Medicare Part B is designed to cover outpatient care . This includes primary care , preventive care , urgent care and more . Treatment that is considered medically necessary is covered under Part B. Your urgent care can be administered in a free standing urgent care facility , clinic , doctors office or hospital emergency room
Yes . Now , how it is covered can vary significantly from one insurance carrier to another and even within the various health insurance plan options a specific health insurance carrier offers . So , your coverage for an Urgent Care visit can range all the way from a simple copayment to being subject to your plan 's deductible and coinsurance requirements depending upon the plan you are enrolled in . Urgent Care is for those situations such as minor injuries or sudden onsets of mild illnesses that do n't justify the use of a hospital emergency room but require timely attention that ca n't be provided by your primary care physician -LRB- weekends , doctor is all booked up that day , etc. -RRB- . Services delivered in an Urgent Care setting are usually far less expensive than the same treatment received in an emergency room so most health plan designs are set up to encourage their members to use an Urgent Care/Minor Medical delivery site as opposed to going to the emergency room .
Yes you can . Just be prepared to pay for the visit . Most Urgent Care facilities will want payment at time of the visit . Even if you have insurance they will require copay 's up front if you have any . Urgent care centers are designed to help take the lad off of emergency room visits .
Most will accept Medicare . Urgent Car would be covered under Part B at 80 % of the approved amount . Any facility has the right to opt out of Medicare but when you consider the demographics a doctor or facility would be shooting themselves in the foot by doing so . Check with your local Urgent Care Center to be sure .
Medicare and Medicare supplements cover treatment that is considered medically necessary . It does n't matter if your treatment is in a doctors office , clinic , urgent care center , emergency room or hospital . If Medicare considers the procedure to be medically necessary , it is covered as long as treatment is received in a Medicare approved facility .
Generally Medicare does cover urgently needed care . However , without knowing the specifics of your treatment I can not give you a definitive answer . There are many different circumstances that will determine what treatments medicare will cover and what they wont cover . The best way to find out if a procedure will be covered is to contact medicare directly at 800-medicare or online at www.medicare.gov .
Medicare will pay for ambulance services that are medically necessary . If you are in need of urgent medical care and need a medical transport company to take you to the hospital , those services are covered by Medicare Part B . The biggest issue Medicare beneficiaries face with ambulance charges are in dealing with providers that do not accept Medicare assignment . The excess charges are not covered by Medicare .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
The cost for plans will vary depending on various circumstances . Once thing to consider , the higher the deductible , the lower the premium . And vice versa , lower the deductible the higher the premium . If you choose a deductible only plan then your premiums would be less expensive than with a plan that has a copay to see a doctor for illness or injury . All the plans cover the following : Doctor visits Urgent care and emergency visits Hospital stays Surgeries Preventive and wellness services , like annual checkup Prescription drugs Maternity care Mental health and substance abuse treatment Contraceptive coverage It 's best to speak with a licensed advisor to find the plan that 's right for you .
Great Question . Usally health insurance cover you if you get hurt in a motorcycle accident . If you fall off your motorcycle and need medical attention you can go to your local hospital or urgent care and get service done . You also need to check with your health insurance company to see what is the limits and exclusion on the policy .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
Yes , you sure can . How they will treat you when you get there is a different question . Most hospitals will treat you whether you have health insurance or not . There are some , however , that may not . In that case , they would send you you to the hospital that will treat you . It also depends on what you need . If it 's something minor , you may wait or they may send you to a different hospital . If it 's critical , they will either treat you there or stabilize you to go to a different hospital . Either way , they will bill you for their services and , the more serious the case , the more it will cost . If you 're considering going to the Emergency Room , you should take a moment and think about whether that 's the right place to go . There are many Urgent Care centers that can help you with more minor issues like fevers , sprained ankles , and minor injuries . You 'll probably get treated more quickly and it 'll cost a lot less .
The homeowners policy will provide coverage for damage caused by a ruptured hot water heater . It will not replace the hot water heater , itself . It is very important to get assistance urgently as water damage never improves , it only gets worse . It is particularly critical if carpets or wood floors are involved .
Technically there are n't voluntary health insurance plans but there are voluntary insurance plans that are designed to supplement your existing health insurance plan . Voluntary benefit plans are one of the few growth areas in the health insurance market space and we are seeing new products being introduced and new insurance companies entering this arena on a regular basis these days . Generally , when people are talking about supplementary health plans they are referring to insurance policies that address specific issues such as ; 1 -RRB- Accident insurance - makes a payment to the policyholder when the experience a covered accident like falling and breaking your arm . 2 -RRB- Hospital Indemnity - these policies usually pay a fixed dollar amount per day or per admission for a hospitalization . These policies may also provide fixed dollar benefits for a certain number of doctor 's office visits , urgent care/minor medial or emergency room visits . 3 -RRB- Critical Illness - these policies pay a fixed amount upon the diagnosis of certain specified illnesses such as heart attacks & strokes , organ transplants , cancer , kidney failure . The illnesses covered and the benefit amount will vary from one supplementary insurance carrier to another and from policy to policy . 4 -RRB- Cancer - these policies specifically address the diagnosis and treatment of various types of cancer . 5 -RRB- GAP Plans - plans designed to cover the financial exposure of having a high deductible health insurance plan . There are other variations on the theme and , as stated earlier , this is an area where new products are constantly being introduced . While this trend has been going on for a while , it has certainly been accelerated with passage of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- and the need to address the movement towards higher deductible plans that shift more cost onto the insured person .
If you are sued , call your insurance company immediately . If there is damage to your property that requires immediate attention , file a claim with the company . This is particularly important with water damage or any damage the affects the integrity of the home . If the situation isnt urgent discuss the loss with your agent before filing a claim . If the claim is minor it might be better to forgo the claim and enjoy a further premium discount for being claims free .
Without a retirement plan , your money will probably go to whatever appears to be most urgent at the time . For people with wealth , this could be your children wanting to go to the most expensive colleges , your spouse wanting to buy a very expensive home , or you wanting to take up an extremely costly hobby . For those of more modest means , it could simply be eating out every day . No matter where you are pulled to spend your money , without a plan , there may not be enough left to retire on . Considering that you could easily live 20 years past the age when you retire , it is important to plan ahead so that those years are as comfortable as the years preceding them .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Pest Removal ?
The short answer is no in most situations . Almost all homeowners insurance policies provide an exclusion for vermin -LRB- which would include bugs and animals -RRB- . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Typically they do not . In most cases pest control is considered a maintenance issue and not covered . And renters policies are `` named peril '' policies ; you wo n't find pest occupation of the home as a named peril . However there may be coverage under the owners insurance for pest removal and/or the damage to the building caused by them . Even where the coverage is offered its scope is limited in terms of vermin and type of damage .
A homeowners policy does not cover pest control . It does cover damage to your residence ; however damage from insects is specifically excluded in most policies . Where a pest issue might be covered is hidden damage to the structure . You should call your agent and discuss the matter before submitting a claim unless someone has been injured .
Damage to a structure from termites , ants and insects in general is not covered under the standard homeowner insurance policy . The underlying theory is that such damage is the result of infestation due to negligence on the part of the homeowner as the proximate cause of the occurrence . The homeowner is obligated to inspect for such damage and remedy the situation accordingly . Homeowner insurance covers structural damage that is sudden and accidental in nature . Infestation does not fit these criteria . Check with a qualified -LRB- recommended -RRB- and fully licensed pest control operation in your area . You may be able to purchase a policy or bond that would cover you for certain types of infestation after they have inspected and possibly treated your residence structure . We are talking about structural damages here . There could be coverage for damages that might occur from a roof collapse , for example , resulting from the infestation , that causes loss to other property within the dwelling . However , the infestation damage itself is not covered .
Homeowners policies typically do not cover damage from vermin . Mice are considered vermin . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that may contained within or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . If you suspect you have an issue with vermin in your household contact a pest control agency or purchase pest control items from a local retailer .
Homeowners insurance does not cover damage caused by insects , pests or vermin . This would include damage by termites . Damage by termites is not sudden and/or accidental but an occurrence that happens over a period of time . Generally speaking , any damage that occurs over a period of time is excluded from your homeowners policy .
Renters Insurance does not cover termite damage . In fact termites are not the problem of the renter other then reporting to the landlord . This pest issue rests on the responsibility of the Landlord . Unfortunately the Landlords insurance will not cover the termites either since rodent , insects and vermin are excluded from a property policy . Time to call the exterminator .
Renters insurance or any property insurance does not cover any insects , verminor pests and they damage they may potentially cause . These little creepy crawlers are anuisancebut your best option is to call your local exterminator for help . I would always have this discussion with your local agent on the specifics of your renters insurance policy
Homeowners insurance excludes damage caused by insects , pests , and vermin . Rodents would be vermin so there would be no coverage for the damage to the dwelling caused by the rodents . Also rodents would not fall under sudden and accidental as the damage vermin cause is over a time period . Time to call the exterminator unless you can find yourself a good cat .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Renters insurance much like homeowners insurance will typically exclude coverage for pests -LRB- vermin -RRB- . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
If the demise of the tree was naturally occuring then homeowners insurance will not cover the removal . That would be considered a maintenance issue and homeowners insurance does n't cover maintenance . However if the tree came down on and damaged the home , some coverage would be provided under the debris removal clause of the policy . Lightning damage to trees is also covered by most comprehensive policies , though a low $ $ limit of coverage is provided . Check with your local insurance professional .
Most insurance companies exclude coverage for routine maintenance such as pest control . Most insurance companies will not pay for damage caused by birds , vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . There may be exceptions to that exclusion when the damage is hidden .
This is really more of a legal question than an insurance question but I 'll give you some guidelines . As a general rule , if it 's on your property , it 's your responsibility . So , legally , if it 's your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , he should take care of it . This does n't always happen , and many small battles have ensued over just this type of thing . I 've seen neighbors do some pretty weird things in these situations . I 've seen people send registered letters , call the police , report to the city or township , even hire a lawyer to sue . My advice , be reasonable and talk to your neighbor , preferably before it falls , and come to some aggreement about what needs to be done , if anything . From an insurance standpoint , nothing 's really going to be done with a fallen tree unless it falls on something an causes damage . Then , in most cases , your insurance company will pay to move it off of your home , that 's it . Some homeowners policies will have endorsements available for debris removal which may pay to remove it , usually up to some limit . Many times , though , removing it from a structure is all an insurance company will do and removing the tree from your property is your responsibility .
It 's the homeowner 's responsibility to remove dead or damaged trees before they fall . Homeowners insurance will not cover dead or damaged trees . Homeowners insurance will cover resulting damage and the cost to cut up the tree if the trees falls on covered property . If a tree falls over but does not hit covered property , there is no coverage . If your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , your neighbor is only responsible for the portion of the tree located on his property . The portion of the tree on your property is your responsibility even though it 's not your tree .
Your homeowners insurance may cover the removal of mold . It depends why there is mold in the first place as to whether they 'll cover it . If they do cover the removal of the mold , they will , most likely , have a limit on the damage . For coverage to be triggered for almost anything there must be a sudden and accidental occurrence that can be pinpointed : Roof damage from wind that let water into the house a burst water pipe or broken water heater There must be a covered cause for why the water entered the home . Only then will your company cover any resulting mold damage . Notice that I said `` resulting '' . Mold damage that appears because of seepage or some other maintenance issue will not be covered . Most companies now limit the amount of money they will spend to clean up mold damage . This will be explicitly stated in your policy and you should be aware of what that limit is . So , once again , there must be a covered cause for the resulting mold damage and there will usually be a limit for how much damage they 'll cover . be smart , read your policy and , above all , find an agent you can trust .
Homeowners insurance protects the owner for damages that come from specified perils One peril is fire . If the home is damaged in a fire and asbestos removal is required to repair the home , it would be considered in the claim . There is an additional coverage available on a homeowners policy that provides additional money if repairs require adjustments to meet building codes . That coverage would be helpful under these circumstances . However , removal of asbestos for personal reasons would not be a covered peril .
Unless there are extenuating circumstances behind the removal of the oil tank , I do n't believe that the removal would be covered under any homeowners policy . This would typically be designated as a maintainance issue not a claim issue . If the home is being converted to gas or electric heat from oil it would be the homeowners responsibility to dispose of the oil tank properly .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Life Insurance Be Transferred To Another Company ?
Life insurance can be exchanged tax free from one company to another via the 1035 section of the code that permits this type of transfer . Keep in mind that not all life insurance companies receive policies that have policy loans outstanding from other life insurance companies for exchange purposes .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
If by transfer , you mean the changing of ownership , be advised of the potential taxable event if there is gain the policy . Order an in force ledger and have it reviewed intandemwith the original policy and the last annual policy statement . Having an insurance and tax professional review these documents can assist you in determining the economicviabilityof the transfer . If by transfer you mean , exchanging the present policy under the 1035 rules for a new policy without changing ownership or the insured , you can do that.Whetheryou should that or not is another question . Seek out an insurance and tax professional before moving forward with a transfer or exchange . We can help with that .
Renters Insurance can not be transferred from one tenant to another tenant ; the named insured can not transfer the insurance to another person . However , if the named insured moves to a new rental location , the location can be changed by request to the Carrier 's Customer Service department in writing or online -LRB- if available -RRB- . If the named insured is moving to another State , the policy will need to be rewritten as policy forms are approved separately by each independent State thus requiring a rewrite to the new State . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States should you be unable to make a change to your current renters insurance policy based on your current situation . An exemplary online solution for all ! WEBSITELINK Should you need additional assistance , please contact a licensed professional to answer your specific questions !
Yes . You can transfer the ownership of your life insurance policy to someone else . One reason that people change ownership though is to try to keep it from counting as an asset when qualifying for Medicaid . In those cases , it only works if you transfer it 5-years or more before applying for Medicaid . You can transfer the ownership to a funeral home for a 1st day exemption from Medicaid but you do n't want to do that with a large policy because Medicaid will get any money that is not used for the funeral . You can also transfer the beneficiary from one person to another .
Great question ! There are several reasons why you might want the ownership transferred . As those fine folks mentioned , tax considerations are a good reason ; The inability to manage the affairs due to declining mental health or the death of the owner is another . Another very common reason is the transferring of ownership from the parent , to the insured child once they are in a position to assume that ownership . In my case , I purchased policies for my kids when they were little -LRB- if you have kids , do it as soon as possible also , and save yourself and them a ton of money over their life -RRB- and will transfer the ownership to them when they are capable of assuming the payments . If you have further questions , I 'm happy to help , just contact me . Thanks for asking !
Yes , the policy owner has the right to transfer the policy to another owner . Care would have to be taken to ensure it is done without adverse tax consequences . We have often seen policy owners simply make the change directly with the insurance company only to find out later that the result was taxable . Depending on the facts and circumstances , the transfer itself can be taxable to the extend of gain and in many cases , a transfer might result in the death benefit being taxable when received . There are several ways that a transfer might be arranged such as by gift or sale . There are IRS regulations which set the value of the policy for tax purposes . Life insurance , tax and legal professionals can help you assess your situation to avoid traps so plan ahead before making changes .
Yes , you can transfer ownership of life insurance policies . There are , however , some things of which you should be aware . If the policy is currently assigned for collateral , or there is an irrevocable beneficiary , their consent would be required before a transfer . In Canada , with one exception , transfers of ownership are considered a deemed disposition . In other words , it is the same as if you cashed the policy in and it may trigger a taxable event . The one exception is a transfer to your child when the child is the only life insured under the policy . This creates an opportunity for an intergenerational wealth transfer . -LRB- If interested ask me for details -RRB- . Child includes any natural or adopted child , grandchild , stepchild , son or daughter - in-law . Check to be sure of the consequences , before you make a transfer . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Assuming that you mean due to the replacement of your existing car with another , then yes , coverage would be handled as a transfer replacement on your policy . Otherwise , you would have to buy a new policy every time you bought another vehicle or swapped one for another . It is best to talk with your Insurance Professional about the transaction in order to make sure the transfer of coverage from one car to the other is handled properly and without any un necessary delay . If you are replacing an older car that may not have Collision coverage to a newer car where it is either advisable or required -LRB- by the terms of your loan or lease agreement -RRB- then be sure to talk to your advisor about making sure your revised policy will include all of the required coverage . That is also a great time to talk about any and all available discounts .
On if the Annuity is already in a Qualified Retirement Account . An IRA is a type of Qualified Retirement Account . That basically means the money in the account was contributed on a pre-taax basis . Qualified Retirement Accounts usually can be transferred from one account to another as a general rule . -LRB- there are a few exceptions to this -RRB- But if the Annuity is a non-qualified Annuity then you are not able to transfer it -LRB- it is technically a transfer not a rollover -RRB- to an IRA . And there is no need to do so . An IRA has a less favorable tax status than a non-qualified annuity . It would not be a benefit to transfer it to an IRA .
As with any asset , ownership of a life insurance policy can be transferred to a new owner either by gift or by sale -LRB- or , in rare cases where the parties are less than careful , a transaction that is deemed part gift & part sale . -RRB- However , there are potential tax consequences which are important to keep in mind . Probably the most important tax trap is making a `` Transfer for Value '' of a life insurance policy . If a policy is sold , either for cash or in exchange for some other valuable consideration , the policy death benefit will fully taxable to the beneficiary unless the transfer qualifies for certain exceptions . The financial cost of having what was intended to be a tax-free death benefit become fully taxable is so high , it is imperative to check with a qualified professional before executing a policy transfer . Other tax implications include potential gift tax on the fair market value of the policy if the transfer is by gift , potential income tax on deferred gains in the policy if the transfer is by sale , and potential income tax on the fair market value of the policy if the transfer is from an employer to an employee .
An annuity transfer from one annuity to another is a tax free 1035 exchange . This permits the transfer one annuity to another annuity without incurring a taxable event on the gain in the policy . A 1035 exchange also includes the notification of the policy surrender from the replacing company to the existing company .
life insurance proceeds are payable to an insureds estate , is their value includable in the insureds estate - The entire value of the proceeds must be included in the insureds gross estate even if the insured possessed no incident of ownership in the policy , and paid none of the premiums . -LSB- 1 -RSB- But proceeds payable to an executor in his or her individual capacity rather than as executor for the insureds estate were not treated as payable to the insureds estate by the Tax Court . -LSB- 2 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Est. of Bromley v. Comm. , 16 BTA 1322 -LRB- 1929 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Friedberg v. Comm. , TC Memo 1992-310 . When are life insurance proceeds that are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate includable in the insureds estate ? Proceeds are includable in an insureds gross estate if the insured legally possessed and could legally exercise any incidents of ownership at the time of the insureds death . It does not matter that the insured did not have possession of the policy and therefore was unable to exercise his or her ownership rights at the time of his or her death , -LSB- 1 -RSB- or that the insured was unable as a practical matter to effect any change in the policy because the policy was collaterally assigned . -LSB- 2 -RSB- The proceeds are includable even if the insured can not exercise his or her ownership rights alone , but only in conjunction with another person . -LSB- 3 -RSB- It has been held that an insured did not possess incidents of ownership where the insured had paid no premiums , did not regard the policy as the insureds own , and had made an irrevocable designation of beneficiary and mode of payment of proceeds . -LSB- 4 -RSB- But even if the proceeds are payable to a beneficiary other than the insureds estate , and the insured possesses no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds are nevertheless includable in the insureds gross estate if they are receivable for the benefit of the insureds estate . Even though the insured retains no incidents of ownership in the policy , the proceeds may be includable in the insureds estate if the insured has transferred the policy within three years before the insureds death . -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Comm . v. Est. of Noel , 380 U.S. 678 -LRB- 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Goodwyn v. Comm. , TC Memo 1973-153 . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- ; Goldsteins Est. v. U.S. , 122 F. Supp . 677 -LRB- Ct. . Cl . 1954 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . Can an insured remove existing life insurance from his or her gross estate by an absolute assignment of the policy ? Yes , assuming the insured lives for at least three years after the assignment , the insured assigns all incidents of ownership , and the assignee is not legally obligated to use the proceeds for the benefit of the insureds estate . -LSB- 1 -RSB- If the form of the assignment reserves any incidents of ownership to the insured , the proceeds may be included in the insureds gross estate despite the insureds clear intention to transfer all ownership rights . -LSB- 2 -RSB- It has been held that where the insured had paid no premiums and had never treated the policy as his or her own , the insureds irrevocable designation of beneficiaries and mode of payment of proceeds was an effective assignment of all of the insureds incidents of ownership in the policy . -LSB- 3 -RSB- The amount of any premiums paid on the assigned policy by the insured may be included to the extent they are paid within three years of death . A reversionary interest in a policy is an incident of ownership if , immediately before the insureds death , the value of the reversionary interest is worth more than five percent of the value of the policy . -LSB- 4 -RSB- The insured will have no such reversionary interest , however , if the policy is purchased and owned by another person , or if the policy is absolutely assigned to another person by the insured . Regulations state that the term reversionary interest does not include the possibility that a person might receive a policy or its proceeds by inheritance from another persons estate , by exercising a surviving spouses statutory right of election , or under some similar right . They also state that , in valuing a reversionary interest , interests held by others that would affect the value must be taken into consideration . For example , a decedent would not have a reversionary interest in a policy worth more than five percent of the policys value , if , immediately before the decedents death , some other person had the unrestricted power to obtain the cash surrender value of the policy ; the value of the reversionary interest would be zero . -LSB- 5 -RSB- An insured was treated as holding a reversionary interest in a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement where the insured was considered to have transferred the policy to the trust and retained the right to purchase the policy for its cash surrender value upon termination of the buy-sell agreement . -LSB- 6 -RSB- However , a policy held in a trusteed buy-sell arrangement would not be includable in an insureds estate under IRC Section 2042 where -LRB- 1 -RRB- proceeds would be received by a partners estate only in exchange for purchase of the partners stock , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- all incidents of ownership would be held by the trustee of the irrevocable life insurance trust . -LSB- 7 -RSB- -LSB- 1 -RSB- . Treas. Regs . 20.2042-1 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- , 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 1 -RRB- ; Lamade v. Brownell , 245 F. Supp . 691 -LRB- M.D. Pa. 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 2 -RSB- . Est. of Piggott v. Comm. , 340 F. 2d 829 -LRB- 6th Cir . 1965 -RRB- . -LSB- 3 -RSB- . Morton v. U.S. , 29 AFTR 2d 72-1531 -LRB- 4th Cir . 1972 -RRB- . -LSB- 4 -RSB- . IRC Sec . 2042 -LRB- 2 -RRB- . -LSB- 5 -RSB- . Treas. Reg . 20.2042-1 -LRB- c -RRB- -LRB- 3 -RRB- . -LSB- 6 -RSB- . TAM 9349002 . -LSB- 7 -RSB- . Let . Rul . 9511009 .
Renters insurance is not transferable from one person to another . The other party seeking renters insurance would have to qualify on their own merit . Renters insurance is transferable or portable from one location to another . For example you move from apt A to apt B you simply need to call your insurance provider and the address can be updated .
A 1035 exchange is an IRS code that allows the tax free transfer from one life insurance policy to another . Some life insurance companies may also use the 1035 exchange rules to transfer basis or premium as basis . Generally a 1035 exchange inherently includes a replacement notice as well to the existing life insurance company from the replacing life insurance company .
If you mean transfer the death benefit to another individual the answer is no . Life insurance is written on the individual based on their age and health . If you mean transfer ownership of a policy on your life to another individual or trust , then the answer is yes .
A 1035 exchange is an IRS code section that allows a tax free transfer of cash vales from one annuity policy to another annuity policy or a life insurance policy to an annuity policy . This is also an opportunity to transfer basis in a policy as well for future use . You can not use section 1035 to transfer cash values from an annuity policy to a life insurance policy .
There are conditions under which the assets of a pension plan can be transferred to either another pension plan or to an Individual Retirement Account -LRB- IRA . -RRB- Pension plans have vesting schedules which might limit the amount of the pension that can be transferred . It is best when these transfers are conducted between trustees . It is more complicated if the employee receives the funds in cash .
The answer as to the `` right to transfer '' coverage is specifically addressed in the policy conditions and it generally limits transfer . In the conditions section of your policy the insurance carrier rejects a transfer of the policy without their consent for all the reasons and others not mentioned in Ken Boncela 's answer to this question . All carriers administer this provision differently but generally speaking a transfer from wife to husband , or from husband to wife is typically granted without the need to rewrite the policy . If your name appears on the policy with others the carrier may require a statement signed by the other party to disclaim the interest in the policy of the others named in the declaration page , but a new policy is n't generally required in this instance either . This type situation is one that may come up when a house is owned jointly by family members but not insured as a business or partnership name . As a general rule of thumb , transferred policies carry with the coverage , the accumulated experience of the previous owner -LRB- s -RRB- so for you , it might be better to shed the past and start anew on a policy issued in your name alone . In almost every other instance , transfer is rejected and a new policy is required .
The answer is yes . Combining two annuities into one can be done through an IRS Section 1035 . This is a simple process , the agent will simply fill out two 1035 transfer forms and submit it with the new application . This is all assuming your annuities are Non-qualified dollars . If you have qualified monies , you can still transfer two annuities into one . Instead of using a sec . 1035 transfer , the agent would simple use a transfer form specifying as a direct transfer .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How To Plan For Retirement In Your 20S ?
The day you start working is the day you pay yourself first . Paying yourself first is retirement planning . And what you save to day will determine how you live tomorrow . If your employer sponsors a defined -LRB- tax deductible -RRB- contribution plan like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- with employer matching contributions , fund it to the match . Take the tax savings and fund a minimum death benefit life insurance - TAMRA compliant policy that has different crediting methods . You need to start thinking about retiring at age 70 , living to age 100 without Social Security .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
In Canada , how you get money from a retirement plan depends on what type of plan . If it is a Registered Retirement Plan -LRB- RRSP -RRB- then getting money out is as simple as deregistering and surrendering the plan . You will have to pay tax as the amount will be added to your income . There will be a withholding tax , currently 10 % for up to $ 5,000 , 20 % for $ 5,001 to $ 15,000 and 30 % for over $ 15,000 . If it is a pension plan you can not get money from the plan other than as an income while you are with the company . Depending on circumstances , money from a pension plan is either transferred into a `` regular RRSP '' and can be withdrawn or a `` locked in RRSP '' and usually can not other than as an income . Check with your advisor before you do anything to make sure you are making an informed decision . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Planning for retirement is planning for your lifestyle in your golden years ; you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your effective tax bracket and a life expectancy report so you can create a reasonable timeline . If youre younger than age 45 , you should consider retirement at age 70 because your life expectancy may be 20 to 25 years more if youre a nonsmoker and in good health . You need to determine if your employer sponsors a defined contribution plan like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , especially if the employer offers a contribution match . If your employer doesnt offer such a plan , you may want to consider a Roth IRA or Traditional IRA . If youre self-employed and you make six figure income , you may want to investigate SEPs . Some retirement plans are non-qualified using annuities and/or life insurance to fund their retirement . Once you perform your personal financial profile , you can begin the review process to determine how youll fund your retirement .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
Retirement plans are governed by legislation and withdrawals where permitted have tax consequences . In Canada , you can withdraw from your Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- . The amount withdrawn is added to your income . There is a withholding tax of 10 % for amounts up to $ 5,000 , 20 % for $ 5001 to $ 15,000 and 30 % over $ 15,000 . Pension plans are more restrictive and you can not withdraw lump sums from the plan while you are with the company . Even when you leave there are restrictions on withdrawal other than as an income or transfer to a `` locked-in '' Registered Retirement Savings Plans . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Not all 20 year term policies mean the same thing . My company offered a 20 year non-renewable term policy which meant that the company would pay a death benefit to the beneficiary if the insured died during the precise 20 year period covered by the policy . The premium on that policy would remain level throughout the 20 year period . No benefits existed after the policy terminated . Today they offer a 20 year term policy that provides the same death benefit as before and the premiums remain the same as before , however , the policy can be renewed after the 20th year and for many years after that . The policy will terminate at which time coverage can not be renewed . The premium after the first 20 years is considerably more expensive than in the first twenty years . My company also offers Cash Value Term which for a slightly higher initial premium develops cash value . It works much like the other 20 year term policies except that at the conclusion of the 20 year period there are a variety of options that allow the policy to remain in force for a lower premium or select a permanent , reduced death benefit .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
Regardless of whether you are in you 50 's and are asking how do I start planning or if you are asking how do I plan on retiring when I am in my 50 's the process is the same . First determine what a successful retirement would look like for you . Once you have a basic outline then you can determine what needs to be done to fund it . The next step would be to work with a financial planner to calculate what needs to be done and how your resources should be allocated to make it happen . You will find addition information on retirement planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
First of all , put money in tax advantage accounts . Deposit funds into Roth-IRAs , municipal bonds , life insurance policies and 529 college savings plans if you have kids . When clients open these accounts , they normally do not have to pay taxes when the money is withdrawn . Why ? The client is contributing to these accounts with after-tax dollars . Next , protect yourself by obtaining disability insurance , long term care coverage , health insurance and buy life insurance . Clients need life insurance so that loved ones can pay the bills and have funds to provide for the family . The long term coverage will help just in case a client needs care in a nursing home . Reduce your liabilities as soon as possible . Get out of debt and stay out of debt . Set aside at least three to six months of your monthly salary . There might be a change in employment , there might be an accident , or repairs to the home or car . Here is a brief overview that will help clients plan for retirement . Start early . For example , if you save $ 10 a day for 30 years and invest the money at 8 % per year , you would have almost $ 450,000 for retirement . Moreover , if clients saved $ 20 a day for 30 years at the same rate , he or she would have almost $ 900,000 for retirement . This is why the concept of using tax advantage accounts is so important . Here is a good rule of thumb when planning for retirement . According to the Financial Analysts Journal , `` Americans need to save 22 times their income '' to retire comfortably . What does this mean ? Clients that make $ 40,000 a year , need $ 880,000 when they retire -LRB- i.e. $ 40,000 x 22 -RRB- . Keep in mind that this is only a tool to use that will help you with your retirement planning . Finally , clients need to take into consideration their home mortgage balance -LRB- s -RRB- , the kids college education costs and life insurance needs . I will be glad to help you meet your retirement planning goals . I listen to all my clients first . Then , we develop a plan and then we execute that plan . I can be reached at 912-631-3186 .
Of course , how much life insurance costs for a 20 year old depends on how much life insurance the 20 year old is purchasing , how long they want the premium to be locked in , whether they have any health problems , and if they want to purchase a policy that requires an exam or goes with a quick policy requiring no medical exam . For a very healthy nonsmoker at age 20 , who is purchasing $ 100,000 of 30 year level Term without having to take an exam , the price is about $ 25/month . This is much less if you take an exam .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
What does it mean to become fully vested in a retirement plan ? What it pertains to is the percentage an employee gets from employer contributions to their retirement plan . Fully vested means that the employee now `` owns '' 100 % of his/hers employer contributions to their retirement plans . The most common vesting schedule is a 5 year schedule that begins with 20 % and finishes at 100 % . Once at 100 % with no breaks in service you stay at 100 % . If an employee were to separate service after a year , they would take 100 % of their contributions and only 20 % of any employer matching .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Reimburse Employees For Health Insurance ?
This has been a controversial area for several years as I presume you are asking about how to reimburse employees for the cost of individual health insurance . There had been a lot of activity which was embraced by a number of employers in past years to reimburse their employees for the cost of individual health insurance through the use of a Health Reimbursement Account -LRB- HRA -RRB- and making it a deductible business expense no different than an employer contribution to a group health insurance plan . In early 2013 the DOL and IRS issued statements that virtually every benefits professional recognized as being definitive in stating that this practice was not allowed . If an employer does not want to offer a group health insurance plan but wants to assist their employees in purchasing individual health insurance then the only practical way to do this appears to be by grossing up their pay by some amount . Of course , this is no different than giving the employees a pay raise from a tax perspective because that is exactly what you are doing . Also , this well intentioned action by the employer may have the unintended consequence of reducing or eliminating the amount of the Advanced Premium Tax subsidy that the employees might qualify for in the government health insurance marketplaces . But it is now clear than any employer support for employees purchasing their own health insurance can only be done on a post-tax basis . Depending upon a given group 's circumstances this may be a viable option to consider and is being done by some employers . This is an approach that needs to be handled with care and you should seek guidance regarding the applicability of this approach to your company 's specific situation . If you would like to learn more please feel free to contact me .
This concept usually comes up in the context of group health insurance so I will assume that is what you are asking about . Wrap plans were developed as a strategy to help employers better manage their health insurance premium costs . The approach generally works like this . Employer XYZ currently has a group health plan with a $ 1000 deductible , 80 % co-insurance and office visit , urgentcare , emergency roomand prescription copayments . Employer XYZ receives a renewal rate increase of 20 % or moreand finds that their renewal is in line with what other insurance companies would offer . So , changing insurance carriers as a means to reduce the impact of the renewal action is not a viable option . Employer XYZ has an alternate renewal from their current carrier that increases the plan 's deductible from $ 1000 to $ 3500 dollars and the renewal rate for the $ 3500 deductible plan then avoids most or all of the renewal rate increase on the $ 1000 deductible plan . This change helps the employer control their costs but shifts much more financial risk onto their employees and the employee 's dependents . The employer wants to manage their fixed premium costs as effectively as possible but is reluctant to shift so much more risk onto their employees . The employer decides to employ a wrap plan strategy . This consists of moving to the insurance plan with the $ 3500 deductible . However , in addition , the employer at the same time implements a Health Reimbursement Arrangement -LRB- HRA -RRB- which is an IRS approved mechanism whereby an employer agrees to reimburse employees for specified medical expenses . The employer agrees that for any covered employee and dependent -LRB- this is a choice the employer makes , reimbursing only the employee and not dependents ' exposure would also be allowed -RRB- who incurs medical expenses subject to the deductible in excess of $ 1000 will be reimbursed by the employer up to whatever level the employer determines . In this example let 's say the employer agrees to cover the full additional $ 2500 of increased deductible expense exposure . From the employee 's perspective their deductible exposure remains at the $ 1000 level they had previously . With so many medical services covered by copayments under their plan design , the employer anticipates that very few of his covered employees and dependents will utilize services subject to the deductible -LRB- these would be hospitalizations and some outpatient services -RRB- and that will alsoexceed the $ 1000 in deductible responsibility the employee has long assumed . The employer makes no financial outlay under the HRA arrangement until an employee or dependent actually incurs an eligible expense . The employer is making an educated bet that their potential reimbursements forclaims above the $ 1000 deductible level will be less , probably substantially less , than the higher premium they would have paid if they had maintained their old plan design with the $ 1000 deductible . Essentially the employer has implemented a limited form of self-funding of some of their employee 's potential medical expenses . Any HRA reimbursements the employer does end up making are a deductible business expense just like their contribution towards their employee 's health insurance premiums . This approach can help the employer better manage their fixed cost for health insurance premiums , gain a cash flow advantage and still offer an attractive benefit package to their employees . As a word of caution , it should be noted that not all insurance carriers are fans of this strategy . The purported reason being that as these arrangements do n't truly change the employee 's financial exposure to the higher deductible it does not have the same impact on employee behavior in consuming health care as they would expect for a plan with a $ 3500 deductible fully paid by the employees . For this reason , some insurance carriers require disclosure of such wrap arrangements and may adjust their premiums somewhat to account for less of a change in health care consumption than their higher deductible quote was originally based upon . An employer should verify their insurance carrier 's position on this approach before they implement such a strategy .
This has been a controversial area for several years as I presume you are asking about how to reimburse employees for the cost of individual health insurance . There had been a lot of activity which was embraced by a number of employers in past years to reimburse their employees for the cost of individual health insurance through the use of a Health Reimbursement Account -LRB- HRA -RRB- and making it a deductible business expense no different than an employer contribution to a group health insurance plan . In early 2013 the DOL and IRS issued statements that virtually every benefits professional recognized as being definitive in stating that this practice was not allowed . If an employer does not want to offer a group health insurance plan but wants to assist their employees in purchasing individual health insurance then the only practical way to do this appears to be by grossing up their pay by some amount . Of course , this is no different than giving the employees a pay raise from a tax perspective because that is exactly what you are doing . Also , this well intentioned action by the employer may have the unintended consequence of reducing or eliminating the amount of the Advanced Premium Tax subsidy that the employees might qualify for in the government health insurance marketplaces . But it is now clear than any employer support for employees purchasing their own health insurance can only be done on a post-tax basis . Depending upon a given group 's circumstances this may be a viable option to consider and is being done by some employers . This is an approach that needs to be handled with care and you should seek guidance regarding the applicability of this approach to your company 's specific situation . If you would like to learn more please feel free to contact me .
That depends , an employer can absolutely reimburse their employees for qualified medical expenses but only if they do so in a way that provides an equitable enrichment for all eligible employees . The most common and simple way that a business can structure such a benefit is with a Health Reimbursement Account . The HRA is a way in which a business can raise deductibles and lower the premiums and then reimburse employees for qualified medical expenses as they go . The HRA is a notational account so it does not require the business to set aside funds in a specific account . The major benefit for business would be the opportunity to offer a far more comprehensive benefit plan at a lower cost . The lower cost is first delivered through the substancially lower premiums and then sustained due to the majority of employees medical requirements on average not coming close to maxing out their deductibles , so even though they may make a dent in their deductibles and some employees will satisfy their entire deductibles it will not offset the savings realized on their premiums . The one key is that such a plan is available to all eligible employees and does not discriminate against any group of employees especially the high payed employees .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
A split dollar life insurance policy is not a type of insurance , but a way of paying for and collecting on life insurance so that it benefits two parties , usually an employer and employee . The policy is taken out on the employee as a benefit , reward , and/or way to retain them . Premiums and benefits are `` split '' by the two parties . The way the split dollar life insurance policy works involves how premiums are paid , who owns the policy , and how to divide the death proceeds , cash values and/or dividends.There are two popular ways to structure split dollar life insurance . Both designate the employee as the Insured . 1 -RRB- Endorsement . The employer is the owner of the policy and endorses it so that some or all of the death benefit will go to the choice of beneficiary of the Insured , when the insured employee dies . 2 -RRB- Collateral Assignment . The employee owns the policy and collaterally assigns some of the death benefit to the employer as reimbursement for premiums paid . To find out the best way to structure split dollar life insurance for business or family purposes , it is important to have correct financial and legal advice . Call a reputable life insurance agent or agency to start working on your split dollar life insurance policy .
How Employer Health Insurance started ? 1920-1930 : The Rising Price of Medical Care In 1929 two doctors Ross and Loos formed Ross Loos Clinic to provide medical care for 2,000 employees of the water department of Los Angeles for $ 1 per month per employee . Ross Loos grew to 29 locations in LA to provide medical care for city employees at a fixed cost per month whether they visited the doctor or not . The precursor to Blue Cross was founded in 1929 by a group of Dallas teachers who contracted with Baylor University Hospital to provide 21 days of hospitalization for a fixed $ 6.00 payment . The Baylor plan developed as a way to ensure that people paid their bills . 1930-1940 : The Birth of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Pre-paid hospital service plans grew over the course of the Great Depression . Pre-paid hospital care was mutually advantageous to both subscribers and hospitals during the early 1930s , when consumers and hospitals suffered from falling incomes . The AHA designed the Blue Cross guidelines so as to reduce price competition among hospitals . Prepayment plans seeking the Blue Cross designation had to provide subscribers with free choice of physician and hospital , a requirement that eliminated single-hospital plans from consideration . Despite the success of Blue Cross and pre-paid hospitalization policies , physicians were much slower in providing pre-paid care . Blue Cross and Blue Shield developed separately , with little coordination between them . Physicians worried that a third-party system of payment would lower their incomes by interfering with the physician-patient relationship and restricting the ability of physicians to price discriminate . In the 1930s , physicians were faced with two situations that spurred them to develop their own pre-paid plans . Blue Cross plans were becoming popular , and some physicians feared that hospitals would move into the realm of providing insurance for physician services , thus limiting physician autonomy . Advocates of compulsory health insurance looked to the emerging social security legislation as a logical means of providing national health care . Physicians began to organize a framework for pre-paid plans that covered physician services . In 1939 , the California Physicians ' Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- began to operate as the first prepayment plan designed to cover physicians ' services . Open to employees earning less than $ 3,000 annually CPS provided physicians ' services to employee groups for the fee of $ 1.70 per month for employees . The AMA encouraged state and local medical societies to form their own prepayment plans . These physician-sponsored plans ultimately affiliated and became known as Blue Shield in 1946 . Blue Shield plans offered medical and surgical benefits for hospitalized members . Doctors charged patients who were subscribers to Blue Shield the difference between their actual charges and the amount for which they were reimbursed by Blue Shield The market for health insurance exploded in size in the 1940s , growing from a total enrollment of 20 million in 1940 to nearly 142 million in 1950 . During WWII there was a wage freeze however the Federal government permitted employees to provide benefits instead of wages . Companies began offering health insurance to employees and the employer sponsored health insurance market exploded .
Yes a Health Reimbursement Arrangements can fund health insurance premiums , such a arrangement is usually referred to as a PRA -LRB- Premium Reimbursement Arrangement -RRB- . Although such arrangements have become unfavorable due to healthcare reform legislature due to two main reasons 1 . If a employer wants to drop group coverage and have employees purchase individual policies , this can only be offered after-tax -LRB- RR 61-146 -RRB- . This means that such arrangements have lost their tax-advantaged status , which in effect takes away much of the benefit to the employer .2 . A group health plan , including an HRA , used to purchase coverage on the individual market is not considered integrated with that individual market coverage for purposes of the annual dollar limit prohibition . Meaning that even if a HRA were to cover 100 % of employee premiums for individual coverage the employer would still be viewed as not offering MEC -LRB- Minimum Essential Coverage -RRB- .
An FSA is the abbreviation for a Flexible Spending Account plan which is an IRS approved means of allowing employees to set aside payroll deducted dollars on a pre-tax basis to use for several different types of employee personal expenses . Most people encounter an FSA in the context of setting aside money to cover medical , dental or vision expenses not covered by their group health insurance plan but you are not required to be enrolled in a health insurance plan in order to take advantage of your employer 's FSA plan . Also , there are types of FSAs -LRB- Dependent care is an example -RRB- that I wo n't go into at this time . For 2014 the maximum amount an individual can set aside in an FSA has been reduced to $ 2500 . But this change has been somewhat offset by a change to the `` use it or lose it '' rule which in past years meant that any unused dollars in an FSA account at the end of the plan year were forfeited by the account holder . Now up to $ 500 in unused FSA funds can be rolled over from one plan year to the next . Such rolled over funds do not count against the $ 2500 maximum deduction the employee can make in the subsequent FSA plan year so some accumulation in now allowable if your employer has amended their FSA plan document to allow for this . An additional take away though is that over the counter medications are no longer eligible for reimbursement from an FSA . Setting aside funds in an FSA account reduce the employee 's gross taxable income on a dollar for dollar basis . So , depending upon the tax bracket an employee is in , the potential tax savings could be in the 25 % to 40 % range when Federal , Social Security and possibly state taxes are taken into account . An FSA can be a very cost effective tool in helping employees get more value by paying for eligible out-of-pocket expenses .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
In the 1920 's changes occurred that tended to increase the role that medicine played in people 's lives and to shift the focus of treatment from homes to hospitals . These changes caused the price of medical care to rise because of : Advances in medical technology Growing acceptance of medicine as a science Development of hospitals as treatment centers Encouragement for sick people to visit physicians and hospitals . Licensing and standards of care In 1929 two doctors Ross and Loos formed Ross Loos Clinic to provide medical care for 2,000 employees of the water department of Los Angeles for $ 1 per month per employee . Ross Loos grew to 29 locations in LA to provide medical care for city employees at a fixed cost per month whether they visited the doctor or not . The precursor to Blue Cross was founded in 1929 by a group of Dallas teachers who contracted with Baylor University Hospital to provide 21 days of hospitalization for a fixed $ 6.00 payment . The Baylor plan developed as a way to ensure that people paid their bills . 1930-1940 : The Birth of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Pre-paid hospital service plans grew over the course of the Great Depression . Pre-paid hospital care was mutually advantageous to both subscribers and hospitals during the early 1930s , when consumers and hospitals suffered from falling incomes . Prepayment plans seeking the Blue Cross designation had to provide subscribers with free choice of physician and hospital , a requirement that eliminated single-hospital plans from consideration . Despite the success of Blue Cross and pre-paid hospitalization policies , physicians were much slower in providing pre-paid care . Blue Cross and Blue Shield developed separately , with little coordination between them . Physicians worried that a third-party system of payment would lower their incomes by interfering with the physician-patient relationship and restricting the ability of physicians to price discriminate . In the 1930s , physicians were faced with two situations that spurred them to develop their own pre-paid plans . Blue Cross plans were becoming popular , and some physicians feared that hospitals would move into the realm of providing insurance for physician services , thus limiting physician autonomy . Advocates of compulsory health insurance looked to the emerging social security legislation as a logical means of providing national health care . Physicians began to organize a framework for pre-paid plans that covered physician services . In 1939 , the California Physicians ' Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- began to operate as the first prepayment plan designed to cover physicians ' services . Open to employees earning less than $ 3,000 annually CPS provided physicians ' services to employee groups for the fee of $ 1.70 per month for employees . The AMA encouraged state and local medical societies to form their own prepayment plans . These physician-sponsored plans ultimately affiliated and became known as Blue Shield in 1946 . Blue Shield plans offered medical and surgical benefits for hospitalized members . Doctors charged patients who were subscribers to Blue Shield the difference between their actual charges and the amount for which they were reimbursed by Blue Shield . That is where health insurance began
when asked of the expected impact on a practice of the exchanges , 40.5 percent of more than 1,000 surveyed practices said unfavorable and another 15 percent picked very unfavorable . Only 16 percent thought the exchanges would be favorable or very favorable to practices and about 28 percent thought the affect will be neutral . MGMA conducted the online survey in September 2013 with responding practices representing more than 47,500 physicians . Only 29 percent of responding practices plan to participate in exchanges ; another 40 percent are evaluating participation . Those looking to participate cite remaining competitive in the local market , replacing some of the charity care as uninsured patients get coverage and providing care to underserved populations as the primary reasons . Those practices not participating are significantly worried about five issues arising from insurance exchanges : administrative and regulatory burdens -LRB- 64 percent -RRB- , collecting payments because of patient financial burdens such as high deductibles -LRB- 62 percent -RRB- , low reimbursement rates that pose a financial risk to the practice -LRB- 59 percent -RRB- , concerns of assuming financial liability during a 90-day grace period for enrollees -LRB- 59 percent -RRB- , and uncertainty and confusion about exchange products -LRB- 53 percent -RRB- . That worry extends to practices evaluating exchanges as well , with more than 80 percent citing low reimbursement rates , liability during a grace period and patient financial burdens as major barriers to participation . Most surveyed practices that received patient rate information from exchange insurers found the reimbursement rates of commercial insurers to be somewhat to much lower than they currently receive , with traditional Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement through exchanges also considerably lower . Full survey results - WEBSITELINK
Certainly President Obama has never publicly made any statement that would indicate a plan to take away Medicare and to do so would be an act of political suicide . Whatever position you may take on our president 's actions , results or intentions , he has demonstrated some pretty keen political survival skills . The more appropriate question would be `` Are the President 's health care policies going to have a negative or positive effect on Medicare ? '' An examination of the Affordable Care Act and its funding mechanisms shed more light on this subject . To help pay for the expansion of health care for those under age 65 and to provide the premium subsidies for persons earning less than 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level you will find that approximately $ 700 billion dollars in what would have been increased spending on Medicare are being diverted to ObamaCare over the next decade . We will still be spending more on Medicare 10 years from now than today but at reduced levels and at precisely the time when more Americans than ever will be moving into Medicare as the Baby Boom generation fully enters its Medicare years . The net consequence of this would seem to be negative to the Medicare population . Projected reimbursement levels to health care providers for serving Medicare patients -LRB- already thought to be below or at the cost of providing these services by many health care providers -RRB- are expected to steadily decline in the coming years and I have seen reports indicating that they will fall below reimbursement levels for Medicaid patients . The number of physicians accepting new Medicare patients is already a national problem and if reimbursement level decline as predicted this will only make the access problem worse for senior citizens . And , yes , a national review board is supposed to provide `` guidance '' on appropriate treatments for seniors though the composition of this body and any recommendations they will be making are unclear at this time . This is the so called `` Death Panel '' some have referred to . This term may be overstated but as described in the health care reform law it will have great latitude in its decision making and little outside oversight . So , I will conclude by saying that the reasonably expected impact of the health care reform law on the Medicare population does not bode well and will make it even harder for the program to live up to the expectations of the persons who will be covered by it . Remember , while campaigning , then Senator Obama , when asked by a person if his program would pay for a pacemaker to be implanted in her 100 + year old mother who was still active , had a will to live and wanted to enjoy a good quality of life , said in response that `` will to live '' was a subjective measure that would be impossible to administer and that perhaps the best response would be for her mother to just take a pain pill . Though to be fair , he did n't say whether she should just take a pain pill as needed or to take a handful and wash them down with some Jack Daniels .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
I like to look at this question a little differently . There are basically three parts to your auto insurance policy . One part covers you if you hurt somebody -LRB- or something -RRB- . A second part covers you and your family if someone hurts you and does n't have any insurance or not enough to reimburse you for your injuries/suffering/lost earnings . A third part covers the car you may be driving should it be damaged . How much coverage would you expect someone to have if they hurt you or a family member ? That is a good guide for how much liability coverage you should consider . Your liability limit for others and uninsured/under-insured motorists limit for you should be consistent . If someone or something damaged your car , would you want to be reimbursed ? If so , your auto insurance should include comprehensive and collision coverage . Older fully paid car ? Still may be worth several thousand dollars and well worth insuring . It 's better to have a higher deductible than no coverage at all . If your insurance coverage meets these tests , this may be the best insurance coverage for you . Then I like to consider insurers who will also provide my homeowner 's / tenant 's coverage through a respected local agent with reasonably competitive premiums .
Long term care insurance can cover costs associated with assisted living facilities as well as care provided in the home or in a nursing home . It depends on what the policy covers . Most policies available for sale today are reimbursement but a few are indemnity . Long term care insurance policies that provide indemnity benefits pay a specified amount for each day of covered services regardless of the actual costs incurred by the insured . Long term care insurance policies that provide reimbursement benefits reimburse the insured for costs he or she incurs for covered services up to a daily , weekly or monthly maximum stated by the policy .
In most cases , you can have multiple disability policies . However , it may not make much sense depending upon the reimbursement terms of each respective policy . Most disability policies have limits on the payment amount which is most often determined by a percentage of current salary . If you have multiple policies , you will need to reveal this to each , at the time of policy purchase and/or at the time of claim submission . Multiple disability policies often occur when an employee receives a disability policy from his or her employer but wants to supplement the amount of income reimbursement , in the event of an income loss due to a disability . Often , but not always , payment from one policy will be off-set by the amount of payment from an additional disability policy , so that the policyholder does not receive more than the actual amount of income loss . Read each policy carefully , particularly as each addresses payment provisions .
There is much misinformation spread about this topic . The former answer at least implies that a doctor can just `` decide '' whether to accept Medicare assignment or not . It is important to understand that this is only true if a doctor has signed a non-participating agreement with Medicare . Most doctors -LRB- approx . 97 % -RRB- are contracted with Medicare as `` participating physicians '' , and as such must accept Medicare assignment , i.e. the Medicare approved amount for the service as payment in full . Participating physicians are not permitted to bill any Part B excess charges . Next , the former example given is simply incorrect : `` if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . '' The truth is that if the doctor is contracted as `` non-participating '' with Medicare and chooses not to accept assignment , they are first penalized 5 % of the Medicare approved amount -LRB- $ 400 x 5 % = $ 20 penalty -RRB- . Medicare will only reimburse $ 380 for this example -LRB- $ 400 - $ 20 penalty -RRB- . The doctor can bill you up to 15 % of the $ 380 as an excess charge in this example , or $ 57 . In not accepting assignment , the doctor may bill/collect $ 437 -LRB- $ 380 Medicare reimbursement + $ 57 excess charge -RRB- . This gives the doctor the opportunity to receive $ 437 instead of the $ 400 Medicare assignment , which in effect is a 9.25 % increase in revenue . Non-Participating physicians can decide whether to accept Medicare assignment on a case by case basis , and often do accept assignment , because if they do not , Medicare reimburses the claim to the beneficiary -LRB- consumer -RRB- , and the physician then must collect the reimbursement and the excess charge from the consumer in full . This adds administrative and collection costs that many non-Par physicians do not want to deal with . The former answer states that If you live in one of the states banning Part B excess charges , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . But the truth is that Part B excess charges are not a concern , let alone a major concern , regardless of what state you are living in . For the reasons stated , Part B excess charges are rarely billed . Ask any Medicare beneficiary when was the last time they received a claim payment directly from Medicare -LRB- required if doctor was non-Par and refused assignment -RRB- . You will be hard pressed to find anyone answering yes .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How To Be Medicare Certified ?
When yuo speak of being `` medicare certified '' you are usually speaking of the fact that there are two classes of medicare sales people-those that sell medicare selling that is unregulated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services vs. those that do sell Medicare advantage . To be `` medicare certified '' you have to take the AHIP exam -LRB- American Health Insurance Portablity Act -RRB- . It is both time consuming and expensive . This year when I finally completed the certification I had 24 hours invested in just the recertification . Then CMS regulates Medicare Advantage sales people like we are crooks whereas the Medicare Supplement sales people are allowed to go unregulated . I assume you realize you have to have a valid insurance license for theState you reside in .
To be Medicare certified means that a provider of Medicare services has been approved and certified by Medicare , so thus are able to be reimbursed by Medicare for providing eligible services . They are able to become certified by applying for a National Provider Number -LRB- NPN -RRB- and for Medicare certification though a local Medicare carrier .
When yuo speak of being `` medicare certified '' you are usually speaking of the fact that there are two classes of medicare sales people-those that sell medicare selling that is unregulated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services vs. those that do sell Medicare advantage . To be `` medicare certified '' you have to take the AHIP exam -LRB- American Health Insurance Portablity Act -RRB- . It is both time consuming and expensive . This year when I finally completed the certification I had 24 hours invested in just the recertification . Then CMS regulates Medicare Advantage sales people like we are crooks whereas the Medicare Supplement sales people are allowed to go unregulated . I assume you realize you have to have a valid insurance license for theState you reside in .
Everyone does die , so do you mean all at once or a few at a time ? ; -RRB- When a person passes and they have life insurance , in order to pay a claim , the insurance company must be presented a certified copy of the death certificate . Usually it is a good idea to have several certified copies of a death certificate made at the same time , around 5 or 6 as there will be many times where a copy will be asked for.In the case of life insurance , when the death claim is filled along with the certified copy of the death certificate , an insurance company begins the process of generating a check -LRB- s -RRB- to the stated beneficiaries on that policy . The check includes any interest gained from the date of death till the date of the check being created . Normally within 5 working days checks are issued after the claim form and the other required documents are presented.So that should answer your question if everyone dies and they have insurance , but they die as they have for all time . If we all go at once ? Well ... . would it matter how claims get paid at that point ?
You can get Medicare hospice benefits under Part A when you meet all of these conditions : Youre eligible for Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital Insurance -RRB- . Your doctor and the hospice medical director certify thatyoure terminally ill and have 6 months or less to live if yourillness runs its normal course . You sign a statement choosing hospice care instead of otherMedicare-covered benefits to treat your terminal illness . -LRB- Medicare will still pay for covered benefits for any healthproblems that arent related to your terminal illness . -RRB- You get care from a Medicare-approved hospice program . Hospice care is intended for people with 6 months or less to live if the disease runs its normal course . If you live longer than 6 months , you can still get hospice care , as long as the hospice medical director or other hospice doctor re-certifies that youre terminally ill . Most hospice patients get hospice care in the comfort of their home and with their families . Depending on your condition , you may get hospice care in a Medicare-approved hospice facility , hospital , nursing home , or other long-term care facility . Coverage would include `` room and board '' in this instance .
Medicare will pay for home health care by a Medicare certified home health agency -LRB- HHA -RRB- if four stipulations are met : 1 -RRB- You must be homebound , meaning that it is very taxing to leave home , and assistance of a person or equipment is needed to do so . Trips to the doctor are allowed , and short trips to church , barber , etc are OK as long as they are infrequent . 2 -RRB- You must need skilled care either intermittently -LRB- at least once every 60 days -RRB- or continually on a short term basis -LRB- daily for 3 weeks , more if needed but the need is finite -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Your doctor must sign a Medicare home health certification and plan of care . And 4 -RRB- You receive your care from a Medicare certified HHA .
Yes ! Depending on your condition , you may get hospice care in a Medicare-approved hospice facility , hospital , nursing home , or other long-term care facility . The hospice benefit with Medicare allows you and your family to stay together in the comfort of your home unless you need care in an inpatient facility . If the hospice team determines that you need inpatient care , the hospice team will make the arrangements for your stay . Hospice care is intended for people with 6 months or less to live if the disease runs its normal course . You can get hospice care for two 90-day benefit periods , followed by an unlimited number of 60-day benefit periods . A benefit period starts the day you begin to get hospice care and it ends when your 90-day or 60-day period ends . You have the right to change providers only once during each benefit period At the start of each period , the hospice medical director or other hospice doctor must re-certify that youre terminally ill , so you can continue to get hospice care . If you live longer than 6 months , you can still get hospice care , as long as the hospice medical director or other hospice doctor re-certifies that you 're terminally ill . You can read more details about Hospice Care & Medicare on my blog at WEBSITELINK
It depends on the are you live in and your individual situation . Humana is a Medicare Advantage Plan . Each area is different . If you can not afford a Medicare Supplement then I would shop for a good Medicare Advantage Plan in your area , it may be Humana or it may be another plan such as United Health Care , Aetna , or Anthem Blue Cross . A good local agent who is certified in Medicare Advantage plans and is familiar with the plans in your area can help guide you in the right direction . Every situation is different . A medicare Advantage Plan will offer more coverage than original Medicare . A Medicare Supplement offers even better coverage because it will pay in addition to original Medicare . Humana does offer a Medicare Supplement , but make sure you shop because they may not be the best option depending on where you live . Again , a good local agent can be a great help to you .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends on the type of life insurance you have . Some policies -LRB- life funeral preneed life insurance -RRB- will pay within 24-hours of your death and do NOT need a certified death certificate . These have been popular since around the mid 1980 's and are a good choice if people are depending on life insurance to pay for a funeral . Most other life insurance will be within 3-days of recieveing a certified death certificate .
Usually it does n't take long to receive a death benefit check . First a claim form must be completed and returned to the insurance company , along with a certified copy of the death certificate . Certified copies of a death certificate can take a few days . Once a company receives the outstanding requirements , they will process and issue a benefit check . The check will include interest earned from the date of death to the date of issue of the check . Payment of proceeds are usually done as quickly as possible as most states have requirements insurance companies must follow in these situations .
The coverage depends on if you are covered by Original Medicare -LRB- PartA & B -RRB- abd then you would typically also have a medicare supplement plus PartD coverage , or if you are covered by a Medicare AdvantAGE PLAN . Under original medicare you have to be hospitalized for three days and then admitted to the skilled nursing facility . It is important that this coverage is not available for CUSTODIAL CARE . Assuming the doctor certifies that skilled nursing care is needed medicare pays all costs for days 1 - 20 . For days 21-100 there is a copay of $ 148 for 2013 and then changes to $ 152 for 2014 . After 100 days you will realize why having a Medicare Supplement is so important and you need to understand the coverage limit of the policy you choose . With Medicare Advantage you are not required to be hospitalized for three days before being admitted to the Skilled Nursing Facility
Medicare pays the hospice provider for your hospice care . Theres nodeductible . Youll pay : No more than $ 5 for each prescription drug and other similarproducts for pain relief and symptom control .5 % of the Medicare-approved amount for inpatient respitecare.For example , if Medicare pays $ 100 per day for inpatient respitecare , youll pay $ 5 per day . The amount you pay for respite carecan change each year . You can get Medicare hospice benefits when you meet all of theseconditions : You 're eligible for Medicare Part A -LRB- Hospital Insurance -RRB- . Your doctor and the hospice medical director certify thatyou 're terminally ill and have 6 months or less to live if yourillness runs its normal course.You sign a statement choosing hospice care instead of otherMedicare-covered benefits to treat your terminal illness . -LRB- Medicare will still pay for covered benefits for any healthproblems that are n't related to your terminal illness . -RRB- You get care from a Medicare-approved hospice program .
The short answer is it can . When buying a used car that has undergone some type of damage , the previous insurance company that paid out the claim will rate the damage on a scale of A - F. Here , D means the vehicle was involved in some type of serious collision . Here is the hypothetical where it could seriously effect your insurance . Lets say you buy a category D car . Lets also say you do not have it inspected by a certified dealership or certified mechanic before the purchase . Lets further assume there is chassis that goes unrecorded by a pre-purchase inspection . Now , while driving your new car you get into an accident and make a claim . The insurance company will take the position that any serious damage was there before you bought the car and a result of the previous accident . However , if we remove the assumption that you did not get an inspection , you can show the inspection to your current insurance company and get all of the damage related to your current accident covered by your claim . I hope this makes sense and helps .
Medicare will cover skilled care when : 1 -RRB- The facility providing the skilled care is Medicare certified . 2 -RRB- You have Medicare Part A and there are remaining days in your benefit period . 3 -RRB- You have stayed in the hospital three consecutive days for the same condition which requires you to receive skilled care . 4 -RRB- Your skilled care must generally be received within 30 days of your hospital stay . If you stop receiving skilled care and then need it again within 30 days , you should not need to have another three day hospital stay to qualify . 5 -RRB- Your care is ordered by a Medicare approved doctor and reasonable for your diagnosis . Medicare will cover skilled care meeting the above conditions , in full , for the first 20 days . After that , a co-pay is required up to day 100 , when Medicare no longer covers the cost of receiving skilled care .
Most Medicare Supplement plans do not include prescription coverage . Only some of the old , no longer offered plans include it . If prescription drug coverage is a concern , a stand alone prescription drug plan can be used as well as a Medicare Supplement policy . Another alternative may be a Medicare Advantage plan that includes drug coverage . Be sure to consult with an agent certified to represent Medicare Advantage plans . There are some significant differences between a supplemental plan and a Medicare Advantage plan .
How to write a letter for a life insurance claim ? There really is n't a need to . Contact the carrier or go online and you will find or request a death claim form . In it , there should be instructions on how to fill out and what additonal paperwork may be necessary . Usually a certified copy of the death certificate is needed for submittal . Your agent should be able to help you complete the steps you need to .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare should be notified of your death as soon as possible . Medicare will request a certified death certificate as part of the process . Assuming you have a Medicare supplement plan , your carrier should also be notified of your death . If Medicare and your Medigap carrier are not notified in time to stop your next payment , you can ask for a refund .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover A Sports Injury ?
In most cases , yes . Your health insurance plan will cover a sports injury . Exceptions would be professional sports and some organized sports . Professional sports should be self explanatory . Examples of organized sports include avocational interests such as competitive dirt bike or off-road racing . Competitive ski events are another situation where your health insurance coverage could deny a claim .
In most cases , yes . Your health insurance plan will cover a sports injury . Exceptions would be professional sports and some organized sports . Professional sports should be self explanatory . Examples of organized sports include avocational interests such as competitive dirt bike or off-road racing . Competitive ski events are another situation where your health insurance coverage could deny a claim .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
Health insurance is important because it is the way we finance health care . Health care is expensive with office visits , lab tests , x-rays , and surgery whether inpatient or outpatient . Most people do not have money saved up for medical expenses and therefore purchase health insurance to help pay for medical care . 80 % of Americans spend less than $ 900 annually on medical care and if you are young and healthy you may not think you need health insurance . Health insurance also protects us against large and unexpected medical expenses . The large health care expenses young adults have are usually caused by outdoor activities and sports where injuries can create high medical bills . Those are the main reasons why young adults should purchase health insurance to protect against larger unexpected medical bills .
No , Nationwide no longer offers Health insurance for individuals . The company does offer specialty accidentcoverage plans under the `` Group Protector '' program , however , for amateur sports teams , camp and conferenceprograms , ROTC/JROTC , Auxiliary police and fire , special events , travel , recreation activities , youth groups , and others . We offer both Primary -LRB- first to pay -RRB- and secondary -LRB- next to pay -RRB- plans . All group participants are automatically covered . Accidental death and specific loss -LRB- loss of limb , sight , hearing -RRB- benefits included . GrouProtector provides accident medical insurance and accidental death insurance for community groups and special events in the event of an accidental injury or death during a sponsored group activity .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
The cost of insurance for a sports car will vary , depending on the type of car , who will be driving the vehicle , the state ofoccupancyand other factors . As you may have guessed , a sports car is typically more expensive to insure than a regular compact or SUV . Of course , a sports car is more fun to drive ! For specific rates and prices , as brokers , we provide the lowest available prices from top-rated carriers . It 's best that you contact an experienced broker or visit their website for specifics that pertain to your situation .
That is a great question ! It is n't so much the number of doors , as it is the make and model of the car . A sports car is generally going to be more expensive to insure than a station wagon , typically because of the way they are driven . Statistically , the sports car will be more likely to be involved in an accident or garner traffic violations , than the pedestrian , family car . The sports car will typically be more expensive than the average family sedan also , making the premiums higher . That is what will cost you , not the number of doors , so much . Thanks for asking !
That 's a great question ! It is important because young adults are exposed to a great number of health risks . They are new drivers , and their risk of being injured in an accident is higher ; They are involved in sports and activities in school , which often lead to injuries ; And they are exposed to many passed bugs in their school environments . They often are working first jobs , and trying new things . In such an atmosphere of change and risk , health insurance just makes sense . thanks for asking !
It may be considered as a sports -LRB- performance -RRB- car , depending on : 1 . Insurance carrier guidelines 2 . Line of business : personal or commercial ? 3 . Vehicle year make and model . Mustang with a smaller engine may be considered as a sedan and with a larger engine may be considered as a sports car . It does n't cost more to insure Mustang .
There is no pat answer to that question . Soooooooooo many variables . If a 16 year old strikes out on his own to purchase car insurance for a so-called sports car , he will likely pay tremendously more than a 16 year old who insures a sports car or any car for that matter , with the same company as the other household drivers and cars are insured with . In addition there are the myriad of other factors that weigh into the rate , i.e. the specific car , policy coverage limits , driving record , credit , homeownership , etc , etc. . Call an insurance professional for guidance .
Awesome question . With most , if not all life insurance application forms , one question in particular asks if you plan on doing any dangerous sports within a certain amount of years . Typically that would be a decline if you do plan on participating in these types of sports .
As with most hobbies or recreations , motor sports has a wide variety of types and levels of participation . The impact that race car driving will have on your ability to get a life insurance policy and the terms of that policy will depend on the specifics of your particular type -LRB- s -RRB- of racing . Racing in sanctioned sports car club events or in a hobby stock division at a local short track will have no impact on your ability to get life insurance . Being a test driver for an F1 team will make you uninsurable through any standard life insurance company . This is another great example of why getting life insurance as soon as you are able can be such a good idea . People rarely start racing at very dangerous levels . Similar to the way your chances of having health problems increases with age , to some extent your opportunity to have risky hobbies also increases through your twenties and thirties . It generally takes some amount of career and financial success to afford many of these avocations . Fast cars , fast boats , airplanes , mountain climbing vacations and the like all require money that usually comes a little later in life . By getting a good amount of inexpensive insurance when you are young , you may avoid paying for some risky behavior you pick up down the road . Just a little food for thought you future dare devils :-RRB-
Blanket Life Insurance is life insurance that coves a group of individuals while they are temporarily exposed to a common hazard . E.g. a blanket life insurance policy might be use to cover passengers on a commercial flight , sports teams for while they are participating on the team , newspaper carriers while they are delivering papers , etc. . The blanket policy does not cover this group outside of the event for which the blanket policy was purchased .
Most health insurance policies will cover nutrition counseling through a dietician though under what circumstances can vary significantly from one insurance carrier to another and from policy to policy . Remember , many larger employers are self-insured which gives them much greater say in what is covered under their plans than groups using fully insured health insurance plans . The bottom line is that you need to look at your policy 's summary of benefits and possibly contact your insurance carrier to verify what your coverage would be , for what conditions would it apply , and for how many visits or for what length of time . Generally a medical diagnosis for a condition such as diabetes , high cholesterol and/or high blood pressure or anemia -LRB- among others -RRB- would be situations where the services of a dietician could be viewed as medically necessary . Getting sports dietary nutrition counseling so you can become a marathon runner for example would not meet that criteria and is highly unlikely to be covered under your health insurance .
Assuming this question refers to term life insurance , there are several health classifications for both male and female with differing guaranteed periods of coverage like 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . A life insurance company will determine your underwriting classification based on your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . It also includes activities that can modify the premium price based on motor vehicle violations , dangerous recreational sports or hazardous vocations . Some of the reoccurring insurance company names that frequent the term life insurance spreadsheets are SBLI and Ohio National .
That is a great question ! Depending upon where you live , your State will have a minimum required amount . In Texas , it is 30/60/25 - $ 30,000 max payout per person for an accident , $ 60,000 total paid per accident , and $ 25,000 max property damage paid . That said , we recommend that you have coverage equal or better than 100/300/100 . We have a very large number of very expensive foreign sports cars in Houston , and $ 25,000 does n't go far in repairing one , if you are unfortunate enough to hit one . I hope that helps ! Thanks for asking !
You ask if `` renters insurance cover break ins '' . I am going to assume you are asking : What happens if the apartment building burns down ? A thief broke into your apartment ? What if a guest slips and injures themselves in your kitchen ? What happens if the apartment suffers water damage ? What about all my clothing , furniture , televsions , computer , iPod , musical or sporting equipment , and my wife 's jewelry ? The answer is yes , Reneters insurance covers all the above . Smart investment .
That is a great question ! The Pro players generally have health insurance through plans set up by the player 's union . The Clubs themselves will have policies for non-playing personnel , and may offer as contract stipulations/bonus 's some level of coverage for the players , but as a rule it is done through the player 's union . In some cases the team may cover the minor league players , -LRB- some MLB teams do this also -RRB- in others it 's the union , depending upon contracts , playing time in the big leagues , etc. . As you might imagine , due to the increased risks of playing contact sports , the benefits and coverage will be greater than what the average health policy would be . I 'm certain that the Player 's Union Rep or the specific team 's HR person could give you specifics , should you ask . I appreciate your question though , and you for asking it ! Thanks !
They CAN take a long time . The good ones build their reputation on settling claims as quickly as possible . Most wo n't start a claim until they have recieved a certified death certificate and claim form . The majority will pay within 30-days of receiving that . There are some that make a sport out of dragging on the claims process . The longest I 've personally seen was 8-months and about 6 of those 8-months was because they had n't had time to look at it yet . It was inexcusable . The very best will pay the claim within 24-hours of death with no death certificate needed . The claims process does n't get any better than that . If the death occurs with in the first 2-years it will be contestable and that will slow down the process . But it should still be within 2months .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Pay For Portable Nebulizers ?
Yes , Medicare will pay for portable nebulizers as long as they are ordered as medically necessary by your doctor for conditions such as COPD , HIV , CF , pneumocystosis , tracehostomy and some others . The expense is covered by Part B and you may have to choose whether to rent or purchase your nebulizer .
Yes , Medicare will pay for portable nebulizers as long as they are ordered as medically necessary by your doctor for conditions such as COPD , HIV , CF , pneumocystosis , tracehostomy and some others . The expense is covered by Part B and you may have to choose whether to rent or purchase your nebulizer .
Azilect is a medication that is covered under Medicare Part D -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- . You have to be enrolled in Original Medicare to get a Part D plan . You can also enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- like an HMO or PPO -RRB- that includes Part D prescription drug coverage . Any drugs that are covered under Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- are ones that get administered in a doctor 's office -LRB- injections -RRB- , certain oral anti-cancer drugs , drugs used with some types of durable medical equipment -LRB- nebulizer or external infusion pump -RRB- . Sometimes drugs are covered under very limited circumstances -LRB- certain drugs in a hospital outpatient setting -RRB- . Since it falls under Part B , you pay the 20 % of Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . If you feel like you need help paying for your Medicare prescription drug costs , you can contact Social Security -LRB- 1-800-772-1213 -RRB- to apply for Extra Help . According to CMS , Extra Help is a `` Medicare program to help people with limited income and resources pay medicare prescription drug plan costs , like premiums , deductibles , and coinsurance . ''
Medicare does cover Durable Medical Equipment , however , exercise equipment would most likely not be covered . DME is most often things like wheelchairs , hospital beds , oxygen equipment , nebulizers and the like . In most cases , Medicare will pay 80 % and you would be responsible for 20 % . Depending on the plan you choose , the 20 % would be covered by your Medigap policy . To find out for sure , call 1-800-MEDICARE .
Some Medigap Plans sold in the past did cover prescription drugs ; however , Medigap Policies sold after January 1 , 2006 are not allowed to include coverage for prescription drugs . Medigap Plans fill in the `` gaps '' that original Medicare does not cover . So it will pay for approved Medicare items . With that said , Medicare only covers a limited amount of drugs . Examples include : injections recieved in the doctor 's office , certain oral anti-cancer drugs , some types of drugs used with various durable medical equipment -LRB- ex : nebulizer or external infusion pump -RRB- , and under extremely limited circumstances , certain drugs you receive in a outpatient hospital setting . Some drugs in a hospital setting are known as `` self-administered drugs '' -LRB- drugs you normally take on your own -RRB- . These are not covered by Part B and , therefore , not paid for by your Medigap Plan .
Medicare Part B covers durable medical equipment -LRB- walkers , wheelchairs and power mobility devices , power lifts , oxygen , prosthetics , hospital bed , infusion pumps , nebulizers , CPAP devices for sleep apnea -RRB- . After the Part B deductible of $ 166 has been met Medicare will cover 80 % for durable medical equipment . If you have a Medicare Supplement it will pay the other 20 % .
Typically , inhalers -LRB- and the drugs administered by inhalers -RRB- are covered under Medicare Part D and not original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- . A nebulizer used at home may be covered under Part B as durable medical equipment , however , traditional inhalers and other inhalation type drugs would be covered under Part D . If you 're under original Medicare -LRB- and have/don ' t have a Medicare Supplement plan -RRB- and would like to have coverage for your inhalers -LRB- and the drugs administered by them -RRB- , you should secure a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan to have them covered . If you 're on Medicare Advantage instead , check to see if your plan includes prescription drug coverage as it may cover the inhalers as well . Please note , whichever type of health plan structure you have , drug coverage will have a shared cost involved . Be sure to check with your carrier to see how the inhalers will be covered and how much . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , Medicare Part B covers durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- . This includes wheelchairs , nebulizers , blood glucose monitors , hospital style beds and more . For them to cover it , you need a valid prescription from the doctor which includes your name , date of birth , address , the type of DME that you need , the duration of time you will need it for , and a diagnosis code for the condition it is treating . With that prescription , any medical supply store that is contracted with Medicare will be able to provide the equipment .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
Medicare Part B medications are usually provided and given by someone in the doctors office as part of a treatment . There are a couple of exceptions that may be picked up at a local drug store . These include medications to be used in a nebulizer , medications to prevent rejection of a transplanted organ , and diabetic testing supplies . If your doctor wants you to pick any of these up , make sure that the prescription is written following CMS directions or the pharmacy will not be able to bill Medicare . This includes having the diagnosis code written on the prescription , exact quantities and frequency of use , and your name , date of birth , and address written on the prescription .
Yes in most cases . As long as it is a medical necessity and prescribed by a doctor these will usually be covered as durable medical equipment under Part B of Medicare . The drug used in the nebulizer will most likely be covered under your prescription drug plan .
Generally , yes , many health insurance plans will cover the cost of a nebulizer because it would usually be medically necessary for someone to have one due to breathing issues . You can check with your carrier to find out if it will be covered for your specific situation and how it will be covered . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A good question ! Portability in insurance is similar to portability regarding anything else . For example a portable radio is one that you can take with you to the beach or a friends house . The question of portability regarding insurance usually comes up when discussing employer sponsored insurance . In many if not most cases insurance that is purchased through an employer sponsored group plan is NOT portable . That is if you leave the company your insurance terminates . Some products such as Aflac supplemental health insurance ARE portable even when purchased through your employer on a payroll deduction . There are some employer sponsored life insurance plans that are portable , so you should ask your employer or the HR department what yours is .
When it comes to health insurance , portability is the ability to take your coverage with you when you move , either your residence of jobs . When it comes to moving to another state , you can typically only take your insurance policy with you if the company offers coverage in both states . As it relates to employer coverage , portability refers to whether or not you can keep your employer sponsored plan once you are no longer employed . While COBRA coverage does allow one to temporarily maintain their group plan , at a higher price , the lack of true portability of an employer plan is one reason many individuals are better off obtaining their own individual policy .
That is a great question ! In Insurance speak , `` portability '' means the coverage travels with you . The typical health insurance policy that is employer issued -LRB- a part of your benefit package at work -RRB- will not be portable , because it ends -LRB- COBRA notwithstanding -RRB- when your employment does . A policy purchased through the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- marketplace -LRB- WEBSITELINK -RRB- on the other hand is portable , since it is tied to you , and not your employer . As a result , you can switch jobs without having to re-insure each time . I hope that helps - thanks for asking !
HIPAA is the health insurance portability and accountability act . When you lose your employer group health insurance coverage due to loss of your job , you have a guaranteed right to continue your coverage . Portability rights extend to all covered family members individually and collectively . Your `` portable '' coverage is the same plan as offered through your employer . Your COBRA coverage will expire in most cases after 18 months .
Group Life Insurance covers Death , just like any other Life Insurance Policy . So when the beneficiary presents a Death Certificate to the Life Insurance Company , they will cut them a check for the specified amount . Most Group Life Insurance is not what is called `` portable '' , meaning that you have the option to continue coverage after your employment ends with that company . If your Group Life Insurance is extremely cheap , then it is most likely true Group Life coverage and will not be portable if you were to change jobs . Some companies offer `` Voluntary Life Insurance '' or `` Individual Group Policies '' that do transfer with you when you change jobs . Often these policies have simplified or less stringent underwriting , so they can be good opportunities for people with more serious health conditions . Just remember to always ask if the policy is `` portable '' or not when you change jobs . If it is not , it is highly recommended that you secure an Individually Owned Policy .
This solely depends on the plan you have through your employer . The basic plan they offer is usually not portable however if you apply for additional coverage , this amount may be portable . Remember , consult your HR person at the company you work for . If the policy you have is through what we call Worksite Insurance , then yes , it should be portable . Group Plans tend not to be as flexible however may have this built in . I like to always recommend that you seek out your agent/broker to determine how much you really should have versus what you currently have . This way , even if you do not opt for more , you will know the shortfall and your beneficiaries may be able to make adjustments accordingly .
Personal life insurance is completely portable . The policy does not change if you change address or employment . Group term life insurance is usually available only to employees . If you dont work for the company any longer , your term life expires . Conversion refers to your guaranteed right to exchange a term policy , either personal or group , for a permanent insurance plan offered by the company , without consideration of your medical condition . When you leave an employer you are offered conversion privileges because the coverage isnt portable .
Life insurance portability means that you can take your policy with you when you leave your job , or you can keep your insurance if your business closes . If your group life insurance has the option for supplemental insurance that you are paying yourself , you may be able to keep the supplemental part and just continue paying the same premium . Otherwise , you may be able to convert your group coverage to a permanent policy that is individually owned by you . However , it is done , life insurance portability is a great feature to have in group life insurance .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Does Health Insurance For Newborns Work ?
If a group health plan , health insurance company , or health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- provides maternity benefits , it may not restrict benefits for a hospital stay in connection with childbirth to less than 48 hours following a vaginal delivery or 96 hours following a delivery by cesarean section.You can not be required to obtain preauthorization from your plan in order for your 48-hour or 96-hour stay to be covered . -LRB- However , certain requirements that you give notice to the plan of the pregnancy or the childbirth may apply . -RRB- The law allows you and your baby to be released earlier than these time periods only if the attending provider decides , after consulting with you , that you or your baby can be discharged earlier.In any case , the attending provider can not receive incentives or disincentives to discharge you or your child earlier than 48 hours -LRB- or 96 hours -RRB- . If your state has a law that provides similar hospital stay protections and your plan offers coverage through an insurance policy or HMO , then you may be protected under state law rather than under the Newborns and Mothers Health Protection Act . Health insurance policies will generally cover a new born as long as you enroll your newborn within 30 days of birth . Coverage should be effective as of your babys birth date , just remember , you should enroll your baby within 30 days of the date of birth.Contact your health plan or your spouses health plan as soon as possible to find out how to enroll your new baby in group health plan coverage .
Yes , you can . What kind of health insurance you can get your newborn will depend upon your circumstances but your ability to qualify for and to be offered coverage are guaranteed by law now . If you or your spouse are employed and have health insurance through your employer then you may want to add the child as a dependent on your group coverage . Your child can also qualify for an individual health insurance policy that is guaranteed to be issued and that can not have any pre-existing conditions limits or exclusions . And , depending upon your income level , your newborn may qualify for health coverage under government programs such as the Children 's Health Insurance Program -LRB- CHIP -RRB- or Medicaid . Whichever way you go to get health insurance coverage for your newborn get the child enrolled within 30-days of their birth .
If a group health plan , health insurance company , or health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- provides maternity benefits , it may not restrict benefits for a hospital stay in connection with childbirth to less than 48 hours following a vaginal delivery or 96 hours following a delivery by cesarean section.You can not be required to obtain preauthorization from your plan in order for your 48-hour or 96-hour stay to be covered . -LRB- However , certain requirements that you give notice to the plan of the pregnancy or the childbirth may apply . -RRB- The law allows you and your baby to be released earlier than these time periods only if the attending provider decides , after consulting with you , that you or your baby can be discharged earlier.In any case , the attending provider can not receive incentives or disincentives to discharge you or your child earlier than 48 hours -LRB- or 96 hours -RRB- . If your state has a law that provides similar hospital stay protections and your plan offers coverage through an insurance policy or HMO , then you may be protected under state law rather than under the Newborns and Mothers Health Protection Act . Health insurance policies will generally cover a new born as long as you enroll your newborn within 30 days of birth . Coverage should be effective as of your babys birth date , just remember , you should enroll your baby within 30 days of the date of birth.Contact your health plan or your spouses health plan as soon as possible to find out how to enroll your new baby in group health plan coverage .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
The benefits under each individual health plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Health insurance on newborn 's is pretty much the same as for any age child . Most policies will cover the child from birth if they are added on to the parents policy within the specified time frame -LRB- usually 30 days -RRB- . The health insurance plan will cover injury or illness of the newborn as well as most routine check ups and inoculations
Under the affordable care act , a core of 10 essential health benefits must be met under each marketplace health plan on or off the exchanges . One of these benefits is maternity and newborn care . This includes care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies .
You should add your newborn to your health insurance policy within 30 days of birth . Most policies will automatically cover any newborn baby during those first thirty days . Many children are born with health issues that require ongoing care . If you add your child during the thirty day period there will be no interruption in coverage . Birth of a child is a qualifying life event . This means you can change your plan outside of open enrollment . However if you wait too long you may have a gap in coverage until the next open enrollment period arrives .
Yes . The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
Most carriers require you to notify them of a newborn within 31 days of birth . If you go beyond that point they have the option of requiring medical evidence of insurability . If you are adding the child to a group health insurance plan your HR department can advise you . It could be anywhere from $ 100 to $ 300 per month . Adding a newborn to an individual plan is $ 100 and up . Ask your agent or existing carrier for a rate .
Health insurance policies will generally cover a new born as long as you enroll your newborn within 30 days of birth . Coverage should be effective as of your babys birth date , just remember , you should enroll your baby within 30 days of the date of birth.Contact your health plan or your spouses health plan as soon as possible to find out how to enroll your new baby in group health plan coverage .
Congratulations on your newborn -LRB- or newborn to be -RRB- in the family ! You will be able to get life insurance on the baby when he or she is about 15 days old . It will cost approx $ 3 to $ 10 per month for $ 10,000 of Whole Life . The rate depends on the gender of the baby , and also on the life insurance company , and features of the policy you get .
Life insurance on a newborn is the cheapest that it will EVER be plus once you start a life insurance plan , you are locking in that rate forever ! And the cash build up if you are putting enough in will blow your mind !! Let me show you how it works ...
Unless you purchased your health insurance before March 23 , 2010 your health insurance will change under Obamacare . Obamacare requires that all health insurance sold after January 1 , 2014 include 10 essential health insurance benefits . In addition there are a number of new taxes and fees that will be added to the cost of your policy which will raise the cost by approximately $ 25 per month per insured person . These are the 10 new essential health benefits : 1 . Outpatient care : the kind you get without being admitted to a hospital 2 . Emergency services 3 . Treatment in the hospital for inpatient care 4 . Maternity and newborn care 5 . Mental health and substance use disorder services 6 . Prescription drugs 7 . Rehabilitative services and devices including physical and occupational therapy , speech-language pathology and psychiatric rehabilitation 8 . Laboratory services -LRB- limited -RRB- 9 . Preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management 10 . Pediatric services , including dental and vision care
Maternity riders are dinosaurs . They became extinct January of 2014 with passage of the Affordable Car Act . Previously , most individual health insurance plans did not cover normal childbirth . A maternity rider added this coverage to these policies . The rider came with a long waiting period , or with a large deductible . The Affordable Care Act requires that all health care plan cover ten essential health benefits which now include maternity and newborn care , and hospitalizations with no waiting period . The maternity rider is no longer needed .
Maternity leave is the time taken off of work to delivery your baby and care for your newborn during it 's first weeks of life . Short Term Disability insurance is the type of coverage that covers that time off by paying the new mother part of your regular wages . It is also called `` sick leave '' by some businesses .
If you are covered under a group health plan you have 30-days after the child has been born to add the child to your coverage . As a general rule , adding dependents to your group health coverage requires the provision of the dependent 's Social Security number . This is a point of confusion and concern for many new parents as it can take several weeks before they receive a Social Security number for their newborn child . You should proceed with completing and submitting the paperwork to add the child to your employer 's health insurance carrier with a note that a Social Security number has been applied for and will be forwarded to them upon receipt . In the individual health insurance marketplace essentially the same 30-day rule applies . The exceptions being that you must request enrollment within 60 days of the loss of coverage under a State CHIP or Medicaid program or the determination of eligibility for premium assistance under those programs . Marlin McKelvy Consumer Directed Benefit Solutions www.cdbsagency.com
Each health insurance carrier is different but the general rule is you need to add your newborn to your health insurance policy within 30 days of the birth . You should follow the same procedure for a legal adoption . If you do not add your child in a timely basis there may be a delay in coverage .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Get Insurance On A Car I Do n't Own ?
Car insurance needs to be obtained by the legal owner of the vehicle . You can not insure a car that you do not own . However , with the owners permission you can pay for the car insurance and be listed as a driver if you will be driving the car on a regular basis . Parents do this a lot for children who need help getting started on their own .
If you do n't own the car then typically you ca n't insure the vehicle , you do n't have an insurable interest . If you are worried about having liability insurance when you drive other peoples vehicles then there is a type of policy you can purchase called a broad form policy . It provides you with liability coverage and does n't cover a specific vehicle . Understand that broad form insurance does not give you the option to purchase physical damage coverage such as comprehensive andcollision . If you were at fault in an accident , repairs to the car would not be covered .
As long as you are an authorized driver of that vehicle and the vehicle 's owner has coverage on the vehicle and you reside at the same premise as the vehicle owner you should be able to secure liability coverage for yourself on that vehicle . Contact a local agent to find out more about coverage availability and pricing in your area .
One of the fundamental principals of insurance is that you must have an interest in the item before it can be insured . So the basic answer is no , if you do not own the car and have no interest in the car , then you can not purchase insurance for it . However , there are different interests you can have besides ownership like renting or borrowing . If you have a long term rental agreement you can get insurance or if you are borrowing someone elses car for a long time you can get insurance . In either scenario you will have to coordinate your insurance coverage between the rental agency and the actual owner of the car .
Yes , if you drive the car regularly then you want to get a Non-Owned auto policy . This is common for example if an elderly parent who does not drive owns the car but you use the car . Talk to a good local independent agent to find a competitive auto insurance plan that will meet your needs .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Why get whole life insurance ? I ca n't give you a reason why you should , only why I did . I wanted a locked in price the day I bought it , till the day I died . I wanted something to work both if I died too early or lived too long . I wanted something I owned , that could not be taken away later on . I wanted to control the policy , not the insurance company . I wanted to take away an insurance company 's ability to say no to me . I wanted a safe place to put money to let it grow , to cover for my other investment choices . I wanted a place to access cash if needed , where I did n't have to explain to a guy in a cubicle `` why ? '' and get his blessing . If any of these reasons work for you , by all means consider the choice .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How To Get Discounts On Car Insurance ?
Great question ! There are a couple of great ways to get discounts . Having a clean driving record will get you discounts with some companies , better yet , it helps keep your rates lower ! You can also consider adding another car to the policy , or bundling other policies -LRB- renters/homeowners , etc -RRB- as many companies will give discounts for that also . Feel free to contact me if you need more information . Thanks for asking !
Most auto insurance companies/vehicle insurance companiesoffer a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount : typically , a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount is when you have 2 or more vehicles -LRB- cars , trucks , SUVs , motorcycles ... -RRB- on the same type ofpolicy . Insurance companies usually do n't allow the multi-car/multi-vehicle discount for different types of motorized vehicles on different policies . For example - if you have a car on one policy and a motorcycle on a different policy -LRB- but both policies are with the same insurance company -RRB- then usually you would not get a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount . You would get the multi-car discountif you have 2 cars insured on the same auto insurance policy . Also , most companies that insure motorcycles will give a multi-unit discount if you insure 2 or more motorcycles on the same motorcycle insurance policy . The key point with the multi-car/multi-vehicle discount is that you are usually required to have 2 or more vehicles covered on the same policy . It is always best to review with your professional independent insurance broker to find the coverage options , as well as ways to secureall availablediscounts -LRB- so you wo n't end up paying more than you have to for your insurance -RRB- .
Sure it can . There are many factors that determine the final price of a car insurance policy . Certainly your driving record and history are important factors and , with many companies , so is your credit score . But there are other discounts that may be available depending on the company . Most companies offer discounts ofor insuring more than one car . In some cases , that discount gets deeper the more cars you insure . Liklewise , companies discount their car insurance if you also insure your home . Otheres apply an additional discount if you also insure your motorcycle , Boat or RV and others include a discount if you also have Life Insurance . Ask your insurance professional and you may be pleasantly surprised .
The best answer to this is maybe . You can receive discounts for many things when applying for auto insurance . One of the available discounts is being married . However , if you are married , and only have one car then you are effectively nullifying the discount . The reason for this is the corollary discount to being married is the multi-car discount . If you are sharing a car with your spouse , then you will be rated for two drivers with one auto , which means more exposure and subsequently higher premiums . So the best way to maximize your insurance discounts is be married , each drive your own car , and throw on a type of homeowners policy , even if you are just renting . I hope this helps .
Regardless of the type of car that you drive , the best way to control your insurance costs is to talk to your Insurance Professional about all available discounts and coverage options that are available to you . Talk about various deductibles for both Comprehensive and Collision . Talk about `` bundling '' your personal insurance program because many companies offer nice discounts if you insure your home and car together . Others deepen thse discounts if you also have life insurance or other coverage wit the same company . some companies offer discounts if your car is equipt with an alarm or theft recovery system , while others offer you the chance to have a monitoring chip plugged into your car to see if your driving habits qualify you for reduced rates .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
If both cars are day to day usse cars , titled and registered to you personally you could I suppose , but not a great idea.Most companies offer mult car discounts for insuring more than one car . Insuring twqo cars on two separate company policies would just not be maximising your discount possibilities and could therefore end up costing more . Now , having said that , if you have a regular day to day car and also own a collector car , then it would make sense to insure the collector car with a company that specializes in those .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
Start by talking toyour Insurance Professional about any and all discount opportunities your company may offer . Many companies apoply multi-policy discounts for those who insure their Home , rental apartment , Condominium etc. as well . Other companies offer additional discounts for those who also obtain Life Insurance with the same company . Ask about any `` affinity '' relationship discounts that might be available . Alumni Associations , Professional Associations etc. sometimes have a relationship with an insurance company and it 's members as such receive an additional discount . Here in CT , Nationwide has an affinity relationship with the CT Farm Bureau Federation , to which anyone can join as an associate member . Members receive an additional 7 % discount on their car insurance .
Most people dont enjoy paying their auto insurance premiums each and every month ! So , they often look forward to scheduled rate decreases , such as at the age of 25 . Why do car insurance rates decrease at this age ? Well , because the majority of crash claims are filed by young -LRB- ages 16 through 24 -RRB- and older drivers . As a driver matures , they become less likely to become involved in a crash according to statistics , so to offer an incentive for drivers to stay with a particular insurance company , discounts are often offered at the age of 25 . While it is generally true that auto insurance rates will decrease at the age of 25 , it isnt always the case . Drivers can expect their car insurance rates to decline at the age of 25 assuming the following remain constant - their driving history , incident history , and the make and model of their car . If all of these factors remain the same , male drivers can expect a premium discount as high as 20 % , while female drivers can expect a 12-15 % discount on their rate . Keep in mind that the above discount ranges are averages ; there isnt currently a standard amount of deduction that can be expected ; rate decreases will depend not only on the drivers history , but the insurance company , the type of coverage selected and the overall state of the economy .
Talk to your Insurance Professional to make sure you are taking advantage of every available eligible discount opportunity that your company offers . A few common discount opportunities include insuring more than one car with the same company . Insuring your home with the same company as well as any other things such as motorcycles , boats or RV 's may also trigger discounts . There may also be discounts available if you are a member of a club or group that has an affinity relationship with your company . Keep your credit good and your record clean , pay your bills on time and keep tabs on discounts .
A car alarm will reduce your auto insurance rates . Depending on the type of alarm -LRB- passive , active , etc. . . -RRB- the discount is likely to be approximately 5 % -25 % , depending on the carrier . Also , the discount may not apply to the entire premium . Get ALL of the discounts you are entitled to by working with an experienced car insurance broker . No charges or fees !
Car insurance for a college student is often very cheap , depending upon where you live and the type of vehicle you are insuring . Your age , the vehicle , your driving record , and the liability limits and deductibles will all help determine the rate . Also ... a good student discount can potentially reduce premiums and save hundreds of dollars . Other available discounts can also save money , including a reduction if you are more than 300-500 miles from home . How do you get the lowest auto insurance rates for college students ? Let an experienced broker search and compare multiple companies and you 'll save money , time and an immense amount of frustration ! LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several of the nation 's top-rated car insurance websites that offer the lowest prices for consumers . Online quotes in about a minute .
Safeco is an excellent homeowners insurance company ! Safeco writes preferred middle market homes ; has many discount options available inclusive but not limited to Central Alarm Monitoring , Marital Status , Annual Prepay Credit , Fire Sprinkler , Gas Shut Off Valve , Age of Home , Type of Roof , etc. ... Discounts vary from program to program and are not all available in every State . Safeco is a member of the Liberty Mutual Group , is admitted in all 50 States , offers 24 Hour Customer Service if written through a contracted Gold Service agency , offers registration and access to policies for clients online , excellent claims service as well as multi policy discounts . If you desire , Safeco will package your Home , rental Homes -LRB- Landlords Policies -RRB- , Auto and Personal Umbrella coverage . The greatest multi line discount is the Home/Auto discount . Please note : multi policy discounts are only available if the Named Insured is listed the same on each policy and all policies are Personal Lines Policies . Commercial Policies and Personal Lines Policies are not affiliated when it comes to multi policy discounts . For an instant Safeco quote online , you may select your quote now at : WEBSITELINK Pleasecontact a licensed professional with any questions regarding coverage before buying a policy .
Car insurance certainly can go up or down depending upon a great many circumstances and factors that effect a company 's rate structure . We all know that a great driving record , strong credit history and taking advantage of a company 's `` multi line '' discounts by insuring more than just your cars will certainly help your bottom line . The age of your car , how you drive , whether or not it may be used in business pursuits , these are things that can affect the premium you pay as well . Be sure to check with your insurance professional to be sure that you are taking advantage of all the available discounts .
A little hard to say in a general sense , but this is a terrific question for your Insurance Professional . There are a number of details that are factored when developing the rate that you pay . You mentioned the year of your car as well as the type . A vehicle like yours can in some cases cost more on the liability portion f your policy due to it 's size and weight . Another factor is how you drive -LRB- pleasure or commute for example -RRB- and how many miles you drive . The state and area where you live can be a factor as well . The coverage options that you have chosen will also naturally drive premium . Ask to see if you are receiving all available discounts . If you insure your car and home with the same company , there can be some very nice premium savings discounts available .
The credit discount varies by state and insurance company . Check with the Department of Insurance -LRB- DOI -RRB- with your state to see if it is allowed . Typically each insurance company has their own formula for the discount , and it is considered proprietary information . However , to get a better understanding of factors with your credit score , you should go to www.myfico.com . Although insurance companies are n't looking at your actual score like when you apply for a car loan , many take the following information into consideration when designing their discounting formula : 1 . amounts owed 2 . payment history 3 . credit mix 4 . length of credit history 5 . new credit Whether you like it or not , this type of discounting is also used frequently for homeowners insurance too and can add up to big savings over time .
It is always best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy . Generally speaking , two single individuals insuring their own cars may pay more than two married individuals insuring their two cars together . There are a couple of factors that may cause this . First , the rate structure that a company has for sigle folks as opposed to married folks . The second is a multi car discount aht can further drive down the cost for the married folks . Always be sure to ask about any available discounts when making your decisions on your car insurance .
Great question ! There are a couple of great ways to get discounts . Having a clean driving record will get you discounts with some companies , better yet , it helps keep your rates lower ! You can also consider adding another car to the policy , or bundling other policies -LRB- renters/homeowners , etc -RRB- as many companies will give discounts for that also . Feel free to contact me if you need more information . Thanks for asking !
Talk to your Insurance Professional about your policy and all available discounts . Maintain a good driving record for at least three years as a respected credit score . Insure both your car and home with the same company to start the multi policy discounts . If you add a life policy the discounts may deepen . Association memberships may also trigger affinity discounts as well .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Should I Pay For Long Term Care Insurance ?
It depends on gender , age , smoking status , health condition and whether you use two lives on one policy . A 60 year old male and female , both nonsmokers and in good health can secure an excellent long term care policy for both for $ 300 a month for a base policy .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
A Medigap policy , also known as a Medicare Supplement policy is exactly that . It pays for many of the bills left over after Medicare has paid their share . However , they do n't normally pay anything if Medicare does n't pay first . Some Medigap plans also have some long term care benefits added . You should check with an insurance broker for your state to see what is offered where you are . Medicare only pays for a certain number of days in long-term care . Once those days are up , you are responsible for the rest of the bills . Long term care insurance is used to pay for this sort of situation . Normally , it will start paying a set number of days after you begin to need long term care , and continues until you have used up the money in the plan . Medicare and Medigap pay for the first part of your long term care , then LTC insurance takes over .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Yes , long-term care insurance policies cover the costs of being in an authorized nursing home up to the policy limits -LRB- maximum daily , or maximum monthly dollars -RRB- indicated in the policy , plus any additional purchases of coverage , and any automatic benefit increases , if suchriders were purchased . Today 's long-term care insurance policiesalso cover other types of long-term care , includingcare costsat home , in an adult day-care center , and in authorized residential -LRB- also known as assisted living -RRB- facilities . Some policies also allow for the payment ofroutine domestic care such as house cleaning . A policy that covers all of these potential care costs is called a `` comprehensive '' long-term care policy . Very few facility-only or home care only policies are sold these days . Costs of care in a facility can be paid in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- the caregiver or policyownersets up automatic monthly payments directly to the facility from the insurance company with any additional charges above the maximum daily or monthly benefit of the policy being paid out-of-pocket , or 2 -RRB- the caregiveror policyowner receives aa check to pay for facility service charge after being billed by the facility and having paid that bill out-of-pocket . There are some policies that pay cash directly to the insured in the amount of the maximum monthly benefit regardless of costs incurred . This is called an `` indemnity policy '' and there are very few carriers that offer this type of coverage any longer . If the insured lives beyond the extent of the pool of money provided by the insurance company , the insured must pay for care out-of-pocket to remain in the facility . If the person has purchased a `` partnership '' plan of long-term care andexhausts the funds of thatpolicy , Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- willtake over payments of care as long as the amount paid out by the policy is greater than thethe non-excludableassets of the insured .
In all honesty , Long Term Care Insurance is not important for everyone . If you have very few assets and low income , you may sacrifice to pay Long Term Care premiums for extended care that may or may not be needed , and that Medicaid could cover if needed . If being able to choose your own place and type of extended care is important to you , then Long Term Care Insurance is a great thing to own even with low assets , as long as you can afford to pay the premiums . Long Term Care Insurance is most important for those who have an estate to protect . If you have saved up to pass an inheritance to your loved ones , or wish to pass a business to a successor , your intentions could be jeopardized if you were to to need care for an extended period of time . Long Term Care can pay that for you and allow your estate to remain untouched .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How To Save Money On Renters Insurance ?
The easiest way to save money on your insurance premium with lessening your coverage is to have all of your insurance policies with one carrier as most carriers provide a discount for having multiple policies with them . If this is not an option for you then there are only two other options . One is to lessen your coverage and the other is to shop around .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
That is a great question ! One of the biggest issues we face in the financial industry is the cold truth that many people start thinking about their retirement far too late to adequately fund it . There are few conversations that are harder than having to tell someone that their current income will not allow them to save enough to fund the retirement plans they had dreamed of . Starting early really helps make saving enough a real possibility . By not thinking , `` I 'll start next week/month/year '' the process begins , and allows for enough time to make the possibility a reality . Modern wisdom says to live on your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times that much . If you 're barely making ends meet now , you 're probably going to want to save even more . To be on track to make your retirement goals , the rule of thumb in your twenties is save 15 % of your income . Starting your savings in your thirties increases that to about 22 % . Starting in your 40 's ? Think about setting aside about 27 % . 50 's ? Better plan on nearly 40 % . You can see how increasingly difficult it can be to make up the ground as you age . It is so much easier to start young , and take advantage of time to help build your savings . Having time to build your savings becomes easier when things like employer matching on company 401k 's and compound interest are available to take advantage of . Investing enough in your company plan -LRB- assuming your company is good enough to you to still offer one -RRB- to earn their match doubles your savings , and over time , will make a huge difference . Same with compound interest . Opening an account with compounding interest and depositing in it even if it 's small amounts and infrequently will lead to large values in that account when you are ready for retirement . Many people find that saving the money is hard , studies show nearly 60 % of all American 's do n't have enough savings , and over half of Americans entering retirement age are afraid they will not have enough money to retire on . By having a good , working budget , the willingness to cut back on extra 's , and some dedication , you can avoid being one of them . Please feel free to contact me if you 'd like some help with a budget , or ideas on how to get started saving , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
As soon as possible , the greatest asset you have is time , and it takes time for money to build . If you add earning a rate of return on your money and have that money compound over the years than your money can grow to a huge lump sum . What you want to do is find the right savings vehicle that will give you the best return . How about a tax free retirement ? Are you familiar with tax deferred ? How about avoiding penalties if you take an early withdrawal . There are many things to consider but the earlier you start the greater chance you have of saving a lot of money for retirement .
When you look at retirement planning think of it as 4 phases . 1 . contributions 2 . accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Contribution means how much money will i save each year in my savings vehicle . For example if i have a 401k and i decide i 'm going to contribute $ 5,000 a year that 's my contribution . Accumulation means my $ 5,000 will grow over time in my 401 k savings vehicle.for example $ 5,000 grows in 20 years @ 7 % would add up to $ 219,325 . Distribution is i have saved $ 219,325 in my 401k account , I 'm retired now and i need an income . You decide you want to take out 10 % of 219,325 . Your withdrawal would be $ 21,932 . Now you can have early withdrawals but you have to be aware of which savings vehicle you have because there might be penalties and fees for early withdrawal depending on your age.Some savings vehicles have no penalties . You might want to look at different savings vehicles tha t suite your needs . Transfer is passing your money and assets to your kids , charity , or church when you pass away . Or maybe you have everything put into a trust .
Life insurance does not have a deductible , how ever you should look at your deductibles to see where you can save money to increase you savings . If you have home owners insurance Look at the difference of having a low deductible and a high deductible . You will be shocked at how much money you can save . Now this works with someone who has n't used their deductible in years . The question I have for you , Is that money better off in my pocket or the insurance company ?
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
To start planning for retirement , you should begin to think of how you will generate the income that you have now once you are in retirement . To do this , you simply determine what amount of money will be needed when you retire to generate the income that you now earn . You can then calculate the amount of money you will need to save accumulate this sum of money by the time you wish to retire . There are other quicker rules of thumb like saving 15 % of your income , but you should be careful not to fall into a false sense of security about how well retirement will work out simply by savings a certain amount determined by a broad rule of thumb .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
I will answer this question as a dad . First , take the advice of one of the richest men in the world , Warren Buffet . His advice Rule 1 `` do n't lose '' . Rule 2 `` refer to rule 1 '' . So cover your ass-etts first , buy yourself some decent insurance . if a calamity befalls you , you will not be financially out of the game . Somebody will suffer the calamity . It may be you . 1 . For free life insurance advice , go to www.lfehappens.org and figure out how much you need now . Then buy it . Today . You are not bulletproof . You likely have a friend your age that has died . No second chance . 2 . Car insurance . Since the average SUV you might hit costs lots more than the minimum coverages , do n't get minimum liability coverage . If you hit someone , and have less coverage than what you hit , you may end up paying for the rest of the SUV you hit out of pocket . While I am on it , buy a car you can afford to lose . Pay cash if you can . Cars are just the cost of getting to work . By paying cash , you can save 4,000 a year or more . A nice little pile . Remember : We fly around all day in 30 year old airliners . Airlines maintain their planes meticulously . Maintain your vehicle and it will last . Fall in love with your spouse and your children , not your car . 3 . Furniture , clothes , and other things do not go up in value . Pay cash for items that do not go up in value . If you ca n't pay cash , you ca n't afford it . Goodwill is open in every city . They always have some nice things . 4 . You do not need cable or Satellite . Netflix is 1/10th the cost . Save 1000.00 a year . 5 . Pack a lunch . You can go on a nice vacation with the 2,500.00 or so you will save over the year by not buying a 10.00 lunch . 6 . Do you really need the latest cell phone and unlimited data plan ? No , I did n't think so . 7 . Little piles make big piles . Only when you have saved something can you plan for retirement . The easiest way to make a good retirement possible is to cover your losses , and spend less . Once you have saved your backside risk and saved some capital , how you allocate your funds is less important than the discipline to do it . What gets watched grows in your life . Keep track of your money , using www.mint.com or some other software , and it will grow . when you have big piles , you will by then have the knowledge of how to keep the money working . Let me say it again . Little piles make big piles . Be disciplined . Do so , and you will be comfortable in retirement . I have faith in you . - dad
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
What retirement plan is right for you ? The right plan for you is going to be the one `` you '' actually do . Waiting around for perfect or the plan , simply wastes time . Wasting time is the biggest downfall for most people when it comes to retirements . Personally I do n't care if it 's a passbook savings account or a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or anything , if you fail to do anything , you simply wo n't have anything . There are many options both qualified and non qualified out there to choose from . Read up and pick one that works for you and that you WILL fund . In my profession I 've seen agents make fun of little old ladies with a couple hundred thousand in a savings account . They would comment on how stupid these ladies were ... Me ? I thought they were smart . Yea , sure lots of different things they could have done , but they saved and they saved some more . They had something because they saved something . It 's the habit of saving rather than the plan . Lots of people have `` plans '' with no money in them .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Term Essential Life Insurance ?
I believe you are speaking about the Prudential term product which has both term `` essential '' and term `` elite '' . The former product is the lower in cost , while the `` elite '' coverage has certain advantages should you wish to convert in the future . I believe the less expensive model works for most people , although its a good idea to be aware of both .
Term Essential Life Insurance is the lower cost of two term products offered by Prudential . It comes in 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 year level term , with 30 year term often its sweet spot . It is convertible to permanent insurance to at least age 65 . Term Essential Life requires a minimum face amount of $ 100,000 .
Term Essential is just the name for the term life insurance product from Prudential Life . Every carrier assigns names to their products , but with term insurance , the product is pretty black and white - if you die during the life of the policy , it pays out a death benefit . If you 're still living when the term period guarantee expires and you decide to terminate the coverage , that 's the end of it . There is nothing to cash out with term insurance products as they do not build cash value . Most people will terminate the coverage at the end of the term period or replace it with a new term or permanent life insurance policy . It 's important to review your life insurance program with a life insurance broker periodically to make sure what you have is still the most suitable item for you . As our needs change over time , so does our coverage needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Only you can answer this question of Life Insurance being essential . For those of us who see the financial loss in families who lost a parent or spouse , Life Insurance relieves financial stress allowing you to take care of what is most important , your family . YES , I believe life insurance is essential . Life Insurance provides you or rather your beneficiary with monies otherwise would not be available . You need to look at what is important in your life , who depends on you , your family , perhaps your business and look at what will happen if you are not there `` tomorrow '' . What will happen financially and how would you relieve that financial stress .
Term Essential Life Insurance is the lower cost of two term products offered by Prudential . It comes in 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 year level term , with 30 year term often its sweet spot . It is convertible to permanent insurance to at least age 65 . Term Essential Life requires a minimum face amount of $ 100,000 .
No . Term insurance is exactly what its name implies , you a buying protection -LRB- some might say renting it -RRB- against the possibility of death occurring during a specified period of time . Term Life Insurance is the least expensive form of life insurance because of its defined duration and because it does not contain any cash build up provisions . Some life insurance companies `` enhance '' their term life products with an option called `` Return of Premium '' but the policyholder pays extra premium above and beyond the cost of the basic term life insurance policy for this privilege . Essentially you are loaning the insurance company your money interest free for them to invest for 10 , 20 or 30 years while simply returning the original money you paid in at the end of the policy 's term . I wo n't argue whether this is a good or a bad investment of money , many people are lousy savers so this approach would give them some money at some future date . However , if you look at the price difference between a pure term life policy and a term life policy with the same death benefit amount and the Return of Premium feature and you invested that difference in a mutual fund or the stock market over the same time frames I suspect the vast majority of people would end up with more money by going down the investment route . You should definitely discuss this with a financial planner or other impartial advisor before making the decision to purchase term life insurance with or without the return of premium option . As an insurance sales person , I definitely believe in the value of life insurance , both term and permanent . But the commissions earned are higher when we sell you a term life policy with the return of premium provision simply because the premiums are higher . If your agent does n't at least touch on these issues with you , perhaps you should visit with another life insurance agent .
Life insurance is not essential in terms of being mandated . E.g. Auto insurance is legally required in order to drive a car . Life insurance is not legally required in order to live . Life insurance is essential to most people , however , in terms of being necessary . The people who it is necessary to are not the person being insured . They are those who are left behind .
Essential to whom ? Are you asking if the government requires it as they are with health care . Then the answer is no . Is it essential to you . Depends what your emotional feelings are about the people how are dependent on you . If you 're all by yourself and do n't have any outstanding bills and do n't feel the need to pass on money to loved ones then no , I would n't mess with it . If you 're older say in your 60 's , 70 's or beyond then is may be cost prohibitive . I would need to learn more about you and your needs before such a question can be answered . The bottom line is only you can decide if life insurance is essential . With the help of a good agent you can get a policy that fits your specific needs . There are so many different ways to get there . You just need to work with someone who is asking you the right questions to help you explore the need .
Renters policies are essentially the same type of policy as a regular homeowners adjusted to deal with property and liability exposures for a person who rents as opposed to some one who owns a property . So , the biggest property exposure for a renter is typically the '' contents '' that belong to you . A key issue to be aware of is that losses can be settled on both an actual cash value basis , or replacement cost basis . Replacement cost will be more expensive , but the actual cash value of things is depreciating every day you own it . For example look at the computer you are using . Compare it to ones in use 20 years ago . If you have one of the dinosaurs do n't expect to get much for its actual cash value since is essentially depreciated to zero . The other major group of coverages is called Section II of most renters policies and this offers you protection from claims or law suits alleging that you caused others some bodily injury or property damage to others . An easy example to understand is dog bites which are often the second leading cause of homeowner losses for a carrier . If your dog bites somebody it is not going to matter to an individual or the courts whether you own or rent your residence . Essentially you look to your renters policy for not only the coverage but also very importantly the defense costs associated with defending you from such allegations .
What type of life insurance you get depends on what you want the life insurance for and for how long you want / need the coverage . An independent life insurance broker who represents several companies can help you find the right policy at the right price . Here is overview to get you started : Term is insurance is initially the most inexpensive type of coverage . The premiums rise at the end of each term and the policy has an expiry date . Conversion to permanent insurance is usually permitted before a stated age -LRB- check contract for details -RRB- , Best for short term needs . Whole life is permanent coverage and usually has a guaranteed level premium . The policy 's death benefit could be designed to rise in value , In addition there could be a significant build up of cash value . This type of policy has long term applications in financial , retirement and estate planning . Since the premium is level , it is initially higher than term coverage for the same amount . If cost is a concern a combination of whole life and term can often be an alternative . Universal life can provide permanent insurance coverage . I say can be because it is essentially a whole life policy `` unbundled '' where you control the amount of premium and the investment options . This flexibility is a double edge sword . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Yes , you can and in general terms life insurance is a financial risk management product that the earlier in life one purchases it the lower the cost will be . Without getting too technical there are essentially two types of life insurance ; term life insurance and permanent life insurance -LRB- often referred to as whole or universal types of permanent life insurance -RRB- . Term life insurance will be the least expensive and as it 's name implies it covers you for a fixed term or period of time -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- . Whole life insurance policies are generally designed to cover you throughout life and until death . Whole life insurance policies are more expensive but they often offer features such a cash build up , the ability to be paid up in full over a certain period of time but continue in force until the policy holder 's death . Most people purchase a mix of these two types of policies to cover their differing needs throughout different stages of their lives . For example , you will probably have a need for more life insurance during your working years when you are getting married , having children , have a mortgage and other financial obligations that you want to protect your survivor 's from if you were to pass away during that stage of life . Having a large amount of financial protection with lower cost term insurance for these years is an approach used by many people . They then often compliment the term policy with a lesser amount of permanent life insurance to make sure that if the pass away in old age that their funeral expenses and any outstanding debts are taken care of and that they perhaps leave an inheiritance to their spouse , children and/or grandchildren .
Life insurance creates cash at death . It is essential when death creates an economic loss that you would like to cover in the most economical way with tax free funds . -LRB- If you care that is -RRB- Once the required death benefit is decided upon , often there are additional planning opportunities for savings purposes and in corporate owned situations - executive benefits It may not be essential but it can make planning easier , more predictable and usually more economical If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Yes . The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
The benefits under each individual health plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
Yes . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you can not be declined for health insurance for any medical-related conditions . Each policy is required to cover 10 essential health benefits - one of these essential benefits is maternity care . It 's always helpful to consult with an experienced health insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level , discuss what your specific needs are , and compare multiple companies and their plans to determine which plan is going to be most suitable to meet those needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Term Essential is just the name for the term life insurance product from Prudential Life . Every carrier assigns names to their products , but with term insurance , the product is pretty black and white - if you die during the life of the policy , it pays out a death benefit . If you 're still living when the term period guarantee expires and you decide to terminate the coverage , that 's the end of it . There is nothing to cash out with term insurance products as they do not build cash value . Most people will terminate the coverage at the end of the term period or replace it with a new term or permanent life insurance policy . It 's important to review your life insurance program with a life insurance broker periodically to make sure what you have is still the most suitable item for you . As our needs change over time , so does our coverage needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Life insurance is essential in almost every financial plan . The exception may be the very wealthy . Think of it in these terms . When the rich invest money and they `` hedge their bets '' by investing in vehicles that go in opposite directions . That way if , for example , their stock goes down , their bond goes up . This keeps them from losing all of their money . For hard working folks their best asset to invest is their ability to earn a living . Therefore , if you die to soon and no longer earn , life insurance `` hedges your bet '' that your loved ones are still financially cared for . Therefore life insurance is a very essential part of the plan .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Does Disability Insurance Work ?
Absolutely disability insurance works . It makes sure that individuals and families have income when they are unable to work due to illness or injury . This income provided by the policy allows and individual to continue his or he life a a similar lifestyle if he or she can not work .
Absolutely any disability policy purchased from a reputable insurance company works if you meet the criteria of a claim . In order to receive benefits you must be diagnosed with an injury or illness so severe that you are no longer able to perform the duties of your occupation by a medically licensed physician . Then you must meet the elimination period requirements in the policy . Then benefits will be paid to the extent of the contract . The money may be used for any use you deem fit .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
Disability insurance is paycheck insurance that protects your income during periods of disability when you cant work . If you work for a living and you have to work to live , then disability insurance is paycheck insurance to protect your income in case you are unable to work . Disability insurance may be the most important coverage you should consider . Most Americans has 90 days in cash reserves . A disability is a high probability event during your working lifetime .
How does health insurance work while on disability ? Since I just ended 12 months of disability that included many hospitalizations and treatments , I can tell you it works exactly the same as not being disabled . Disability insurance protects your income , health insurance protects your health . You can have both going on at once . Depending on your employment situation , how your health insurance is paid for may make a difference . Maybe your employer continues to pick it up , maybe it 's covered under workman 's comp , maybe you pay your own premiums . . the main thing is health insurance does n't go away if you 're collecting disability insurance .
It depends on the carrier . Some carriers do not treat normal pregnancy as a sickness that keeps a woman from working and do not replace income during a normal pregnancy . However , to fully answer the question , request a `` specimen policy '' from the carrier you may beconsidering to find out the exact contract language aboutthe replacement of incomeduring pregnancy . Here is a typical treatment of normal pregnancy from a highly-reputable carrier for DI : `` If the Elimination Period for Your Disability Benefit is less than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are not covered Sicknesses . However , if the Elimination Period is equal to or greater than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are covered Sicknesses subject to the definition of Disability . '' Now , one has to refer to this carrier 's specific definition of disability in the specimen policy : `` During the Your Occupation Period * you are not able to perform with reasonable continuity the substantial and material acts necessary to perform your occupation in the usual and customary way and you choose not to work at any occupation . After the Your Occupation Period You are not able to engage with reasonable continuity in any occupation in which you could reasonably be expected to perform satisfactorily in light of your age , education , training , experience , station in life , and physical and mental capacity . '' * Insurance-speak for the occupation you are in when you become disabled ; you pick the period of this part of the definition of disability when you apply , typically 2 years up to age-67 . The longer the your occupation period , the higher the premium . Thats because the risk to the company is higher to replace income for a longer period of time due to the fact that the choice to work in another position or not during this period is yours . The key to the question is : does your condition of pregnancy restrict you from working ? The insurance carrier will want to know that from your doctor before they will start the clock on the elimination period -LRB- 90 days -RRB- , after the fulfillment of which you will start to get income replacement checks . If you add a `` partial disability rider ' , usually at extra cost , you might not have to be `` totally '' unable to work in your occupation to get a pro-rated replacement of income as you work part-time . Again , refer to the specimen policy .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
You need disability insurance as `` paycheck protection '' . You should look at your current monthly budget and determine what needs to be covered if you were to lose your paycheck due to an accident or illness . 1 in 4 20 year olds will go on disability before they retire from work . You should look at the your expenses and determine what is the net amount of income that I could get by on . Many people have disability insurance through their employeer . You have to be careful because this policy is usually paid `` pretex '' and is taxed upon your drawing income . You need to check your employeers policy to determine what your benefits are for disability . Business Owners can get a disability policy to pay for their business income . What would happen to your business if you could not do what you do daily to generate income . Would you need to hire somebody ? You can get a policy to cover this . Would your business stop working and revenue dries up ? You may be able to cover this . You need to work with an independent agent to compare the rates and benefits of multiple companies as they treat each situation different . An example would be a Physician who might be offered more income during their disability with a particular company . You would need to check to see if you receive benefits if you can not work your current profession versus working at anything . All paychecks need protection . You should have your evaluated and deceide how you would do if you became disabled .
You may have group disability insurance available to you through your employer , however , you will find generally find stronger coverage through an individual disability insurance plan . A disability is a sickness or injury which interferes in your ability to work and earn a living . In disability insurance , there 's 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST IMPORTANT factor to look at in a policy . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True own occupation is the best definition you can have . Gainful occupation is commonly seen in group policies and offers the least coverage . One of the drawbacks of group coverage is if your employment is terminated , you lose the coverage . An individual policy goes with you wherever you go and generally features stronger coverage and a better definition of disability -LRB- a true own occupation or modified own occupation definition -RRB- . You want to buy your disability insurance when you 're healthy - this type of coverage is much more in depth than life and health insurance . If you have a pre-existing condition , you may face an exclusion rider for the condition under a given policy or be postponed for the coverage until it 's resolved . Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance that has moving parts to policies . If you 're looking to apply for coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and have experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish and make the process as seemless as possible . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Some things to consider when buying disability insurance are : 1 -RRB- Do you want short term disability insurance , or long term disability insurance , or both ? Long term disability is recommended if you can not afford both , as the effects of being unable to work for many months or years is the most devastating . 2 -RRB- How much -LRB- what % -RRB- of your income do you wish to replace ? It usually makes sense to get as much as you can . 3 -RRB- Do you want to spend more to have Own Occupation feature ? If not , you will need to go back to work when you can do any job . With `` own occ '' you will be paid until you can go back to your own occupation . 4 -RRB- What about Residual Disability ? Getting a policy that offers Residual Disability enables you to receive a partial benefit based proportionate to the amount of income lost when able to resume working part time -LRB- unlike Partial Disability , which just pays a set % -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What does your policy cover ? Make sure it covers illness and injury , and review the conditions covered .
I always say yes because it 's a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about . The way I look at disability insurance is it protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the coverage is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . Factors such as your occupation class , your income level , the state you live in , your medical history , your age , your desired benefit amount and benefit period , if you want cost of living adjustment riders , and other factors all impact your policy 's structure and premiums . In short , they 're very customizable , I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . This is a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about and not something you want to be cheap about . It protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This is a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about . It protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , people can collect Social Security Disability benefits , and do not have to buy private Disability Insurance to get cash while being disabled . However , to get Social Security disability benefits you must generally be disabled for at least a year , and be unable to work -LRB- or be trained to work -RRB- at any job . Private Disability Insurance pays benefits more quickly . Also , with DI , if you have the `` own occupation '' feature , it pays if you can not work at your OWN job , not just ANY job . Finally , private disability insurance pays a higher benefit than Social Security DI . You can even supplement SSDI with DI .
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
Does Insurance Cover Wigs For Cancer Patients ?
Critical Illness insurance pays a lump sum to the insured person upon diagnosis of a qualifying disease . Cancer is one of the commonly covered illnesses , and cancer that requires chemotherapy or radiation is usually covered . The lump sum that is paid to the insured person can be used however they wish , including to buy wigs .
In most situations , Medicare does not cover items that are cosmetic in nature , but there are a few exceptions . Medicare recognizes that part of the healing process and recovery from cancer radiation treatment is the need for the patient to feel normal again . If hair loss is due to cancer therapy , Medicare will usually cover at least some of the cost of a wig .
Critical Illness insurance pays a lump sum to the insured person upon diagnosis of a qualifying disease . Cancer is one of the commonly covered illnesses , and cancer that requires chemotherapy or radiation is usually covered . The lump sum that is paid to the insured person can be used however they wish , including to buy wigs .
There are three ways to answer this question . 1 -RRB- If applying for a new policy while having cancer , it is difficult to find a Term policy that will cover the cancer patient until cancer treatments have ended for at least a year . There are a few policies with graded benefits that will do so . The possibility of getting traditional Term life insurance grows as the time grows that the cancer is in remission . 2 -RRB- If applying for a Term policy with no history or signs or cancer , and just wondering if the policy would cover cancer in the future , yes , it would . 3 -RRB- If owning an existing Term life insurance policy and then being diagnosed with cancer , the policy will cover it .
Life insurance for cancer patients is usually restricted to guaranteed issue policies until a period of time has passed since successful treatment of the cancer . Guaranteed issue policies are almost never available to persons under age 45 , but there are some simplified issue policies that have much more lenient guidelines than others . To find life insurance for cancer patients , contact a good impaired risk life insurance agency and discuss it in person with an agent . If you can not get life insurance now , you can at least set up a plan for the future where you can get more and more coverage for less and less cost , the longer you are cancer free .
What does AFLAC ' c Cancer policy pay ? I can only give you a general idea as each policy pays out different amounts , depending on the level of coverage you purchase . With that said , AFLACs Cancer policies usually pay for : Cancer tests such as Mammographies cervical screening colonoscopies , daily hospital benefit for room and board , some cancer drugs , cancer surgical benefits , anesthesiologist , daily doctor visits while you are in the hospital , blood , plasma , radiation therapy , chemotherapy , reconstruction after surgery , daily visits to the hospital by the patients doctor , benefits for travel to a cancer center including hotel , airfare , gas for your car to get there , ambulance benefits . These are some of the main coverages , but remember that there either annual or lifetime limits as to how much AFLAC will pay , it all depends on your policy .
If they are still receiving treatments for cancer , cancer patients will be restricted to guaranteed issued life insurance . A year or two after the last treatment some simplified issue policies become available . And once the cancer has been in remission for a while , there may be some medically underwritten life insurance that persons with health history of cancer can get . A lot depends on the type and stage of cancer . Contact a good impaired risk life insurance website to obtain the most affordable life insurance with a history of cancer .
Medicare will cover a colononscopy every 24 months -LRB- 2 years -RRB- if the patient is at high risk for colorectal cancer . If the patient is not high risk for colorectal cancer , Medicare will cover a colonoscopy every 120 months -LRB- 10 years -RRB- or 48 months after a flexible sigmoidoscopy .
While in the midst of cancer treatments , the only type of Life Insurance one can get is Guaranteed Issue . Since there are age limits on guaranteed issue life insurance -LRB- minimum age is usually 45 +0 -RRB- , and since it is not available in every state , not everyone can get coverage while having cancer that is not yet removed , cured , or in remission . After a year or two of being cancer free , there are several simplified issue policies that are available in addition to guaranteed issue , and some of these will work for persons under age 45 . The farther out from the time of being last treated for cancer , the better the chances of getting a regular life insurance policy . The type and stage of cancer also enter in . To find out whether you can get life insurance as a cancer patient or survivor , call an agent who can walk through the questions with you and who has an arsenal of policies to choose from . Get one locked in now , and hopefully you can find a cheaper one in the future .
Until cancer treatment has been over for at least a year , most cancer patients must rely on guaranteed issue life insurance to get covered . Unfortunately , guaranteed issue life insurance has age parameters , so some persons with cancer are unable to get life insurance during the diagnosis and treatment stages .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
While trying to purchase a life insurance policy with a history of cancer can prove challenging , even if the cancer has been effectively treated and eliminated , it is possible in fact possible to get term life insurance with a cancer history . The rates for a life insurance policy is determined by the risk classification you qualify for . For example , a person who qualifies for a standard risk class would be viewed as having a normal life expectancy , while someone who only qualifies for a substandard rate -LRB- also known as a table rating and designated with letters A-J or 1-10 -RRB- is considered to have a shorter than normal life expectancy . Since the life expectancy would be considered shorter for someone with a history of cancer , a table rating may be assigned and a higher premium charged . Every life insurance company has their own underwriting guidelines so some companies may respond with a more favorable risk class offer than others even though they 're based on the same exact medical profile . There are several key items that insurance companies will look at to determine the risk classification assigned for your policy . Some of those items include : 1 -RRB- Type of cancer - colon cancer , breast cancer , lung cancer , prostate cancer , melanoma , ovarian cancer , skin cancer , or other internal cancers . 2 -RRB- Stage of cancer - Stage 0 , Stage 1 , Stage 2 , Stage 3 , or Stage 4 . Stage 0 is carcinoma in situ and means the cancer likely has not spread to other organs . Stages 1 , 2 , and 3 indicate more extensive disease with larger tumors or spreading . In Stage 4 , the cancer has spread to other organs and life expectancy is usually very short . 3 -RRB- If there was melanoma only , the `` Clark Level '' would be considered the same way the above stages are . 4 -RRB- Course of treatment how was the cancer treated ? Did you go through chemotherapy or radiation ? Surgery only ? Immunotherapy ? Bone marrow transplant ? something else ? 5 -RRB- How long since the treatment was completed/last date of treatment ? - cancer that was found and treated 5 or more years ago will be seen more favorably than cancer diagnosed only 1-2 years ago . The longer it 's been since the cancer was treated/eliminated/went into remission , the less likely it is considered to come back . 6 -RRB- Have you been treated/are being treated for any other health conditions such as heart disease , diabetes , high blood pressure , high cholesterol , abnormal lab test results , etc. . The best way to obtain term life insurance with medical history including cancer is with the help of an independent life insurance agent that represents many of the top insurance companies . They will be able to shop your full medical history for the best possible offer before applying for a policy . That way , you know what the most likely outcome will be before ever starting the process of filling out formal paperwork and taking an exam . Not only that , but there are no charges or fees for using the help of an agent -LRB- agents are paid by the insurance companies -RRB- . The insurance cost is exactly the same as if purchasing directly from the company . By law , the insurance company can not charge you less for applying directly . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including shopping the case , providing quotes , and comparing options , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It 's 2016 . Let me add to this with an updated reply : We work with about 12 carriers that offer Critical Illness . There only tends to be two `` not covered areas '' with some policies . # 1 . Certain types of Skin cancer are not covered . Skin cancer means melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer . Understand if and at what level skin cancers are covered . Melanoma of the skin , the deadliest form of skin cancer , is the fifth most common type of new cancer diagnosis in American men and the seventh most common type in American women . SO make sure skin cancer is covered . # 2 Know the difference between Invasive Cancer & Carcinoma in Situ -LRB- Non-Invasive Cancer -RRB- . All policies pay a reduced amount for in Situ . Carcinoma in Situ is the earliest form of cancer which involves only the tissue where it is found and has not invaded the surrounding tissue or organs in the body . So when the cancer is smaller and localized , it 's not nearly as `` threatening '' . The benefit amount for in Situ is a percentage of the full amount . So if you bought a $ 10,000 critical illness policy , a typical plan pays 25 % of the benefit amount for in Situ . Or in this example , $ 2500 . The good news is that the other $ 7500 is still there for you to access should the cancer spread . KNOW the percentage that is paid out . I still believe some carriers only pay out at 10 % for in Situ ... I suggest a carrier that is at 25 % . So this is n't a `` not covered issue '' . Invasive vs. in Situ is just know at what level your benefit pays out . Something else ... we lean towards plans that trigger a benefit upon diagnosis , not treatment of , the critical illness . Consider the organ transplant coverage . You need the $ $ way before the actual transplant . It can take months before you are 1st in line for an organ . As with all my other posts , we let underwriting determine the best choice for someone and then the coverage for the premium paid . BYE THE BEST you can qualify for folks ... . Reach out and I can work on getting you a copy of `` Stop Wasting Your Money on Insurance '' . - gravy
The Affordable Care Act does dictate obesity insurance coverage decisions for clinical preventive services as recommended by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force . The task force does not address what insurance companies should specifically cover , so patients must consult their insurance company , and also follow recommendations offered by a doctors office . This can range from intensive counseling -LRB- 12 to 26 sessions -RRB- at the doctor 's office or referring patients out for weight-loss help . Some insurers are using Weight Watchers for patient referrals , while other companies are paying for memberships or offering discounts or reimbursements .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
Critical Illness coverages can provide money to replace lost income and to pay the expenses not coverage by your medical insurance . Studies have shown that medical insurance covers only about 40 % of the true cost of a serious disease such as disease . In addition to medical coinsurance and deductibles , there is loss of income to contend with . The person that is off sick may have disability income insurance to help with this but often the spouse has to also miss work and there is nothing to replace their income . And , if it is their child that is sick , often both will miss work with no income replacement . When you add all the additional expenses of travel , special diets , transportation , child care , etc. the additional expenses can be devastating to a family . One thing I had never thought of before I had a bout with cancer was clothing expenses . I went from 215 lbs to 140 lbs which meant i had to buy new clothes . Now that I am at 185 lbs , my fat clothes do n't fit and my skinny clothes don '' t fit so I have to buy more . Critics of Critical Illness insurance say it is not a good buy because you might have a condition that is not covered under the policy but if you bought a plan that covered every possible event , the cost would be prohibitive . However , you can buy coverage for some of the most common serious conditions at a very reasonable premium . I have never had a cancer patient tell me that their caner or CI policy was a bad buy .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Original Medicare does not pay for dental work that is part of routine care of the teeth , such as exam , cleanings , fluoride treatments , or fillings . It also will not pay for dentures . Some Medicare Supplement plans will cover some dental work . Medicare will cover oral work that done to protect or treat the patient 's general health , or to prepare the patient for surgery , radiation , etc that will be performed for a health condition . It will also cover jaw surgery for a broken jaw , or follow up to an infection after an extraction . If the dental patient has a life threatening condition , Medicare may pay for the cost of hospitalization but not the dental work itself .
That is a great question ! There is an awful lot of misinformation , political manipulation , and muddying of the facts , so it 's really hard to see exactly what is going on . There are some good and bad things that the ACA does with its association with Medicare , and I 'll let you decide which is which . First off is you do not have any changes to your current plan , nor is it even legal for someone to tell you that you have to drop your current plan and try to enroll youin the marketplace . All current plans are grandfathered . One thing the ACA does is close the `` donut hole '' in coverage in Medicare part D . It will eventually phase out the patient cost until it becomes just the usual co-pay , increasing the likelihood that seniors will be able to afford their medications . It also expands coverage by making checkups and wellness visits -LRB- preventative care -RRB- not subject to deductible or co-pays . It does have cuts of $ 716 billion to the Medicare , mostly in the MedicareAdvantage plans that are run by private insurers . We are told that those cuts are to come from reduction in fraud , provider overpayments , and administration overhead . We are also told that the money from those cuts are being reinvested into the Medicare system , and that those reinvestments are expected to keep Medicare 's trust fund solvent until 2029 , an extra 12 years . It will also make cuts to hospitals that have higher return rates of patients by cutting the Medicare payments to those hospitals that are providing the least quality care . -LRB- Interestingly enough , that was a lead story on our news channel tonight , measuring the number of patients who returned to their hospital after treatment for infections that they got while in the hospital before their release . -RRB- Those are the bare bones of what the effects are supposed to be . How it will actually play out is anyone 's guess . Thanks for asking !
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Pet Damage ?
Renters insurance would not typically cover for any pet damage . This would typically be considered the renter 's responsibility or the owner of the animal responsibility . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage that is provided and any exclusions that there may be within the policy or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
It is fair to say that about fifty-percent of all renters own one or more pets . So it is very common for renters policies to be issued to pet owners . These pets are not limited to dogs and cats , of course . The biggest issue is the type of animal and breed . Some are on insurance carriers ' excluded pets lists . Rather than have an effect on the rate charged , more often than not the carrier will refuse to write the policy if one of the excluded animals is involved . The key issue is injury liability to others , caused by bites . Renters insurance will protect if a lawsuit is brought , as a result of someone elses injury , including those caused by pets , up to the policy limits for both physical injury and property damage of others .
As with most insurance questions , the answer includes read your specific policy . There are different policy forms which include different `` levels '' of coverage for both the home itself and the property inside . Basic and Broad form policies only cover you against a specific list of perils . Pet damage is not on this list . Special form policies , however , typically cover the home against any perils not specifically excluded . Most carriers do not exclude pet damage and therefore it would be covered . Unless specifically endorsed , the property inside the home may still be covered under the broad form list of perils even if the home is covered by special form . This leads to a scenario where the home would be covered for pet damage but the property inside would not . As always , the loss would be subject to your deductible so only losses exceeding that amount would be paid .
Most insurance companies do n't offer life insurance for pets nor do most agents have it as a type of coverage they offer . Pet insurance does not pay out proceeds like a traditional life insurance policy . It typically covers veterinary fees , pet health conditions , damage to someone 's property -LRB- caused by the pet -RRB- , and/or pet funeral needs . I would recommend consulting with your veterinarian and see if they can refer you to an agent that offers this type of coverage .
If you have Homeowners or Renters Insurance owning a pet could be difficult . Depending on the company they will not insured you or cancel the policy the minute you do not disclose the pet . Now regarding damage . Pet damage to your own or other persons property generally wont be covered by insurance companies . The typical policy wont cover dwelling , other structures or content when the loss is caused by an animal under the care of the policy holder.I would contact your company and ask if they provide this coverage . If you are looking for another company make sure you ask also as they may give you the same answer . Thank you and good luck .
Renter 's Insurance normally includes Liability Insurance coverage , which would pay for acts of a pet . There are some policies with sub-limits for acts of pets -LRB- means they pay less than your regular liability limit if a pet causes someone to sue you -RRB- , and some with exclusions for acts of pets , so it really depends on your policy . Keep in mind that if your dog bites someone , your insurance will normally cancel the policy if you keep the pet as they believe that a dog who has bitten before will likely bite again . I do n't necessarily agree with that logic but I have seen a lot of families have to put a pet to sleep because it has bitten someone - either due to insurance requirements or law enforcement requirements .
The best answer I can provide is maybe . It really depends upon what damage is done by the animal and if it is your animal -LRB- i.e. pet -RRB- or a wild animal . Your animal & physical damage to your home : more than likely not , unless your carrier offers an endorsement against owned pet damage . I personally have never heard of this type of coverage , but that does n't mean it can not be found in the surplus lines market . Your animal & physical damage to another person or another home : sometimes yes . I say sometimes because if you have a breed of animal that is notorious for attacking people or causing damage your homeowners insurance will exclude it . However , if you have a breed that is typically docile and it randomly attacks a person or damages another person 's property your liability coverage will take care of it . Wild animal : more than likely not . If it is a rodent/pest then there is more than likely an exclusion in your policy . However , this exclusion might be something you could buy back -LRB- i.e. get coverage for -RRB- so check your policy . If it is something not considered a rodent/pest then it is very doubtful you have any coverage . I hope this helps .
Pet Health Insurance is a good idea if you are willing to go to extreme measures to treat your pet , or save its life . Consumer Reports in Sept of 2011 concluded that pet insurance is not necessary for those who are willing to set aside some money each month for their pets ' medical needs . However , other agencies concluded that it is necessary due to the high cost of treating pets and managing their pain . Again , if you are willing to provide dialysis , transplants , diabetes shots , and the like to extend the life of your pet , pet insurance can pay off .
A person can be required to get renters insurance as part of the lease agreement . This requirement helps protect landlords in the case of fire or other disaster . The landlord is not responsible for damage to the contents of the property , but many renters assume they are . A landlord that allows renters to have pets may require renters insurance in case of dog bites . Not maintaining renters insurance would be a violation of the lease agreement and be terms for eviction . Renters insurance is a good purchase for anyone as the cost is very low for the amount of coverage received . This will protect your property in the case of fire or theft .
There are several parts to a general Renters ' policy : 1 . Personal Property : This coverage will cover your personal belongings that are destroyed in a covered event . Each policy is different but the general events are theft , fire , smoke , water damage , wind , hail , and tornadic . You can either choose to cover your personal belongings at Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- or Replacement Cost . Some companies require a minimum amount of coverage to qualify for Replacement Cost . 2 . Personal Liability : Gives you andd your family 24/7 coverage against claims caused by almost any unintentional act . Medical costs for persons injured on your premises , who do not reside within your household . The liability coverage generally covers you whether on or off the premises . Be sure to check with your insurance carrier to verify . This coverage also covers the acts of your pets as long as you list the pets on the policy . 3 . Additional Living Expenses : If you ca n't live in your home after a covered loss , most carriers provide this coverage to cover the additional costs of living , meals , nhotels , etc. . You have the option to add other coverages such as Jewelry Floaters , etc. for an additional premium .
If you have an Ho-3 policy without an exclusion for viscous animals and your animal -LRB- likely a dog -RRB- does not have a prior bite history the policy will likely respond should your pet bite someone and cause bodily injury . Some policies have specific exclusions for specific breeds . Make sure you read the endorsement carefully and check with your local independent insurance agent before filing a claim . I have not heard of insurance policy covering a `` pet '' for replacement ... meaning if your pet dies or gets injured they will not repair or replace the pet-like they would a couch or other personal property . Hope this answer helps .
There are several ways that you can purchase a renters policy . If you search the internet you will find some websites that will actually quote and issue a renters policy . The problem you face with this approach is that a policy is selected to pay your damages when you suffer a loss may be inadequate . It is quite likely that when you actually suffer that loss you will find that you are not sufficiently insured . Then the insurance policy you have been paying on becomes the most expensive policy that you could have purchased because it wont cover your loss . The better approach is to engage an insurance agent . You may not know an agent . Get recommendations from your neighbors , friends and colleagues . A good agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and the insurance company . You really want everyone to be on the same page at the time of a loss . The agent will probably start by asking you the value of your personal property . To prepare for that question , I suggest that you take pictures of everything that you own . You can store that valuable record off site in case of a loss . Review the pictures and make an estimate of the cost to replace everything that you own . The sum of those estimates determines the value you need to set on your renters policy . Remember that you are looking at replacement value , not current value . In this process you might have property that is subject to internal limits within the policy . You need to specify the replacement value of any jewelry , guns , computer equipment , and collectibles . There are other classes of property that warrant special attention . Ask the agent about any unusual property that might be in your possession . The next thing that the agent will discuss is the liability limit . Insist on the highest limit that the agent can write . You can never have enough liability insurance . This protects you by providing for your defense and any awards against you up to the limits of the policy . You want these limits to be very high . A lawsuit can ruin your life . If you have a pet make sure that the agent knows about the pet . This is particularly important if you own a dog . Policies often have greatly reduced liability limits for dogs and may exclude all coverage for dogs of certain breeds or with a history of biting . This is a major source of claims . If you have a trampoline on the property makes sure that the agent knows that as well . Often owning a renters policy is a requirement of a lease . In those cases the landlord generally wants to be named as an additional insured . You need to have his or her name and address to provide to the agent . Incidentally , this is a reasonable requirement of the landlord and might be required by his or her insurance company . The final piece of information has to do with any losses that you might have previously suffered either at the unit you are currently renting or another unit . The information should be as detailed as possible to assist in underwriting your application .
Mark has given you a factual answer but let me give you a personal answer . A renters policy costs less than the loss you might suffer should your property be damaged as a result of a covered loss -LRB- fire , wind etc. -RRB- Insurance isnt a tax but sharing of a risk . Unless you can buy everything in your unit today out of your checking account , having a renters policy makes great sense . The real reason to have a renters policy is to defend you should you be sued for bodily injury or property damage . Anyone entering the property could sue you if they slip and fall or your pet decides to taste their leg . These are really serious issues and the expense can be enormous . Few of us can sustain that type of claim . While Mark mentioned a $ 100,000 liability limit , let me suggest that you take the highest limit that your insurance company offers . Let them take the risk , the premium is insignificant in comparison to the risk .
Renters insurance would not typically cover for any pet damage . This would typically be considered the renter 's responsibility or the owner of the animal responsibility . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage that is provided and any exclusions that there may be within the policy or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Most renters insurance polices will allow you to have most pets . However many will limit you on vicious dogs or exotic pets . Since this can vary by company I recommend you discuss your particular needs with a local agent who can obtain quotes from various companies to find the policy that is right for you .
You would be surprised how many claims there are for little lap dogs biting people . In Florida , many of the carriers that write homeowner 's and renter 's insurance exclude pets completely - no matter the breed . If you have pets , it 's important to discuss that with your agent so that they can place your coverage with a carrier that offers animal liability , if it is available .
I have never heard of pet life insurance , but it is not to say it exists . The few policies of pet insurance I am familiar with all work like health insurance to offset some cost of a veterinarian costs for sick or injured dogs and cats . It is very affordable and vet bills can get expensive . Maybe check with a pet cemetery they may have knowledge of something .
Yes , but you can only buy it from licensed dog agents . :-RRB- Seriously , I can not find any explicit life insurance plan for pets , but I see the some pet health insurance plans have an allowance for pet funerals , burial , and/or cremation . Here is a great website for comparing those plans . WEBSITELINK
Go check out the business insurance offered by PSI-Pet Sitters Int ` l . They offer policies specifically for pet sitters . If their policy allows a minor to purchase it , I would go that route . You may have to purchase it for yourself & list your son as an employee . You may have to be the business owner and ` delegate ' all the pet sittings to him .
The actuary is a person in an insurance company that compiles mountains of data from previous claims . From this information they develop a standard rate . The underwriter is a person in the insurance company that reviews the application to see if it meets the requirement of the standard rate . The underwriter may adjust the rate further or decline a home based upon their review . The standard rate is based on the location of the dwelling , the construction of the dwelling , the cost to replace the dwelling , and the presence of unusual hazards -LRB- trampolines , swimming pools and derelict autos . -RRB- One factor that few consider is the presence of a pet . Some pets have a statistically significant risk of lawsuit . Another hazard is the placement of an evaporative cooler . When they are located on the roof they frequently result in water damage claims . Another consideration is the pitch of the roof . As you can see there are a number of variables that the underwriter must consider . That is why they frequently request photographs of the house .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Can I Get Disability Insurance If I Have Cancer ?
Depending on the exact type of cancer , most companies would probably not issue the policy if you are currently being treated . Cancer can be a devastating disease . No company will issue a policy knowing there is likely to be a claim in the very near future . If you have a minor skin cancer then you may be able to receive coverage , otherwise it is doubtful . The only way to find out is to speak with an agent and do a trial application or have him call underwriting at the company for a preliminary evaluation .
As previously mentioned , the likelihood that you could receive DI from standard carrier is very slim . However , if you 're in remission , there 's a possibility that a company like Lloyds of London would write you a policy . The biggest downside is that , regardless of where you go , they 'll most likely exclude anything pertaining to the cancer , even if you 're in remission .
To qualify fordisabilityinsurance , of course , you must have an income stream that is not currently subject to rapid change . The policy is medically underwritten , so you would have to qualify for coverage . There are many types of cancer and to properly determine the correct answer to your question , you should talk to an experienced broker that is very familiar with several underwriting guidelines of major disability carriers .
Can you get Disability Insurance if you have cancer ? Honestly No . If you are currently being treated for Cancer the possibility of being approved for a disabilty policy is slim to none . True well designed disability is very very hard to get with even modest health issues . Active cancer is a decline .
Video Transcript : Can I get life insurance if I have cancer ? Well , it depends upon a lot of questions . The type of cancer diagnosed , the date first diagnosis occurred . I need to know was it treated by surgery , chemotherapy , radiation therapy , hormonal therapy . I 'll also need to know , enlist the stage of the cancer , as well as the grade of the cancer . I need to know also , has it spread to other parts of the body , because that 's going to be issue for us to be able to underwrite . And then the last one is has there been proper follow ups to your cancer ? Which is CT scans , X-rays , bone scans , laboratory work . I need to know those kinds of things to accumulate enough information to give you the proper offer . Remember , certain carriers are more benevolent in certain types of cancers than others .
I am a huge fan of Critical Illness plans -LRB- CI -RRB- . So I 'm happy to add to the great comments above . What is covered is always defined ... . yet there are a few `` twists to look for '' . Most CI plans have moved to a `` multiple bucket '' philosophy . Most cover the `` Big Three '' critical illnesses : Cancer , Heart Attack , & Stroke . What you have to understand is if the policy is a `` One and Done '' or a `` Multiple Bucket '' plan . One and Done means that once the benefit is paid out for one CI , then the policy terminates . Diagnosed with cancer , you get the check , but there is no benefit for hart attack or stroke . A multiple bucket policy usually has a benefit for different categories -LRB- buckets of money -RRB- : Heart/Stroke , Cancer , Other . So you could be diagnosed with cancer & a benefit is paid . Then the stress gives you a heart attack & a benefit is paid . Then after all that , some `` other CI '' happens and you get a 3rd benefit . ALSO consider what the definitions are WHEN a benefit is paid . Consider an Organ Transplant benefit . Does it pay upon diagnosis and being added to the national registry or does it pay when the physical transplant is completed ? That 's a biiiiig timing difference . Also consider the `` Carcinoma in Situ '' definition and benefit amount . That 's when cancer is isolated to one tissue type -LRB- general definition -RRB- . Being smaller & localized , a Carcinoma in Situ is generally `` not as dangerous or life threatening '' . I believe all CI plans with a Carcinoma in Situ benefit pays only a percentage of the full benefit . So if you have a $ 10,000 cancer bucket , yet it 's Carcinoma in Situ , do you get 10 or 25 % of the full benefit ? Hmmmmm . OR ... does the CI plan your agent is offering even have an in Situ ??? Most have in Situ benefits . Just double check . If you trigger the in Situ benefit know that you still have the remaining percentage left in case the cancer spreads . Usually called invasive cancer . If you received $ 2500 out of your $ 10,000 when it was in Situ , you still have $ 7500 in your `` bucket '' in case things get worse . Look at the riders -LRB- additional benefits too -RRB- . Return of premium upon death -LRB- other than a named CI -RRB- or return of premium after a named period of time , Mortgage payment , accident benefits , hospital benefits , and children 's benefits are riders offered by various carriers . Weigh the cost vs. the benefit based on YOUR specific needs . PLEASE consider coverage for your children . I know that if one of my girls was living in a children 's hospital fighting cancer , I 'd also live there . The cash injection can be financially life saving . HOPE all this helped ... - gravy
While trying to purchase a life insurance policy with a history of cancer can prove challenging , even if the cancer has been effectively treated and eliminated , it is possible in fact possible to get term life insurance with a cancer history . The rates for a life insurance policy is determined by the risk classification you qualify for . For example , a person who qualifies for a standard risk class would be viewed as having a normal life expectancy , while someone who only qualifies for a substandard rate -LRB- also known as a table rating and designated with letters A-J or 1-10 -RRB- is considered to have a shorter than normal life expectancy . Since the life expectancy would be considered shorter for someone with a history of cancer , a table rating may be assigned and a higher premium charged . Every life insurance company has their own underwriting guidelines so some companies may respond with a more favorable risk class offer than others even though they 're based on the same exact medical profile . There are several key items that insurance companies will look at to determine the risk classification assigned for your policy . Some of those items include : 1 -RRB- Type of cancer - colon cancer , breast cancer , lung cancer , prostate cancer , melanoma , ovarian cancer , skin cancer , or other internal cancers . 2 -RRB- Stage of cancer - Stage 0 , Stage 1 , Stage 2 , Stage 3 , or Stage 4 . Stage 0 is carcinoma in situ and means the cancer likely has not spread to other organs . Stages 1 , 2 , and 3 indicate more extensive disease with larger tumors or spreading . In Stage 4 , the cancer has spread to other organs and life expectancy is usually very short . 3 -RRB- If there was melanoma only , the `` Clark Level '' would be considered the same way the above stages are . 4 -RRB- Course of treatment how was the cancer treated ? Did you go through chemotherapy or radiation ? Surgery only ? Immunotherapy ? Bone marrow transplant ? something else ? 5 -RRB- How long since the treatment was completed/last date of treatment ? - cancer that was found and treated 5 or more years ago will be seen more favorably than cancer diagnosed only 1-2 years ago . The longer it 's been since the cancer was treated/eliminated/went into remission , the less likely it is considered to come back . 6 -RRB- Have you been treated/are being treated for any other health conditions such as heart disease , diabetes , high blood pressure , high cholesterol , abnormal lab test results , etc. . The best way to obtain term life insurance with medical history including cancer is with the help of an independent life insurance agent that represents many of the top insurance companies . They will be able to shop your full medical history for the best possible offer before applying for a policy . That way , you know what the most likely outcome will be before ever starting the process of filling out formal paperwork and taking an exam . Not only that , but there are no charges or fees for using the help of an agent -LRB- agents are paid by the insurance companies -RRB- . The insurance cost is exactly the same as if purchasing directly from the company . By law , the insurance company can not charge you less for applying directly . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including shopping the case , providing quotes , and comparing options , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It 's 2016 . Let me add to this with an updated reply : We work with about 12 carriers that offer Critical Illness . There only tends to be two `` not covered areas '' with some policies . # 1 . Certain types of Skin cancer are not covered . Skin cancer means melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer . Understand if and at what level skin cancers are covered . Melanoma of the skin , the deadliest form of skin cancer , is the fifth most common type of new cancer diagnosis in American men and the seventh most common type in American women . SO make sure skin cancer is covered . # 2 Know the difference between Invasive Cancer & Carcinoma in Situ -LRB- Non-Invasive Cancer -RRB- . All policies pay a reduced amount for in Situ . Carcinoma in Situ is the earliest form of cancer which involves only the tissue where it is found and has not invaded the surrounding tissue or organs in the body . So when the cancer is smaller and localized , it 's not nearly as `` threatening '' . The benefit amount for in Situ is a percentage of the full amount . So if you bought a $ 10,000 critical illness policy , a typical plan pays 25 % of the benefit amount for in Situ . Or in this example , $ 2500 . The good news is that the other $ 7500 is still there for you to access should the cancer spread . KNOW the percentage that is paid out . I still believe some carriers only pay out at 10 % for in Situ ... I suggest a carrier that is at 25 % . So this is n't a `` not covered issue '' . Invasive vs. in Situ is just know at what level your benefit pays out . Something else ... we lean towards plans that trigger a benefit upon diagnosis , not treatment of , the critical illness . Consider the organ transplant coverage . You need the $ $ way before the actual transplant . It can take months before you are 1st in line for an organ . As with all my other posts , we let underwriting determine the best choice for someone and then the coverage for the premium paid . BYE THE BEST you can qualify for folks ... . Reach out and I can work on getting you a copy of `` Stop Wasting Your Money on Insurance '' . - gravy
While in the midst of cancer treatments , the only type of Life Insurance one can get is Guaranteed Issue . Since there are age limits on guaranteed issue life insurance -LRB- minimum age is usually 45 +0 -RRB- , and since it is not available in every state , not everyone can get coverage while having cancer that is not yet removed , cured , or in remission . After a year or two of being cancer free , there are several simplified issue policies that are available in addition to guaranteed issue , and some of these will work for persons under age 45 . The farther out from the time of being last treated for cancer , the better the chances of getting a regular life insurance policy . The type and stage of cancer also enter in . To find out whether you can get life insurance as a cancer patient or survivor , call an agent who can walk through the questions with you and who has an arsenal of policies to choose from . Get one locked in now , and hopefully you can find a cheaper one in the future .
Cancer survivors looking at life insurance in the first few years after their treatment ends may have to settle for a graded policy -LRB- one that pays a reduced death benefit in the first 1-3 years for death due to illness -RRB- or higher priced policy -LRB- a flat extra per thousand is added on for a set number of years , then drops off regardless of whether the cancer has recurred or not -RRB- . Unless getting a guaranteed issue policy , there is at least a one year wait since the last cancer treatment before cancer survivors are able to get any policy . The more time that passes , the lower the rate usually becomes , especially if the cancer did not start out at a high grade . Since no one knows the future , I recommend getting what you are qualified to get as soon as you can , then try getting a lower priced policy in the future .
If your skin cancer is basal cell carcinoma , you can usually get life insurance at preferred ratings , as long as your other health is preferred . If it is squamous cell carcinoma , the insurance company will want to know if there was no recurrence after removal , and the stage of your cancer , if you know it . You can possibly be rated as good as standard after a year of being cancer free , and possibly better after extended years of showing no signs of skin cancer . With melanoma , it is treated like any other internal cancer . There will be a waiting period of at least a year to get a medically underwritten or simplified issue policy -LRB- unless perhaps the melanoma was in situ , or stage 0 -RRB- . If it was over stage 3 , there will most likely be a flat extra added for a while . But you can still get coverage . In time , the rates will go down as you hopefully remain cancer free .
Most people can get life insurance after having skin cancer . If basal cell carcinoma , the rates usually are what they would be if the person never had skin cancer . If squamous cell carcinoma , it depends on the stage of the cancer , how it was treated , and for how long the person has been skin cancer free . A standard to low table rating is common . A diagnosis of melanoma will require that the cancer was a low stage , was successfully removed without recurring , and that a certain amount of time has passed since the last treatment , in order to get a medically underwritten policy . It may have a flat extra during the first few years of the policy . If that is not available , persons with past melanoma can usually get simplified issue coverage , and can definitely get a guaranteed issue policy if they qualify age-wise .
There is usually some type of life insurance policy you can get after being diagnosed with breast cancer . If you get a policy that covers you , either after disclosing that you have breast cancer , or because they did not ask -LRB- i.e. guaranteed issue life insurance -RRB- , yes , it will cover death from breast cancer or any other illness or accident . If you got a life insurance policy before having any idea that you were going to be diagnosed with breast cancer , the policy also will cover death due to breast cancer . We hope that the breast cancer never results in death . But if it did , you would be covered .
I believe so , as I both own one , and sell them to my clients . They can help make up the deductables and co-pays that are not paid by the health insurance companies . They can also bring in extra income when the insured or family member is not working due to treatments . Remember that these payments from a cancer policy are paid directly to the insured or beneficiary , not the doctors or hopitals . The statistics say that 1 out of 2 men and 1 out of 3 women will contract some form of cancer in their lifetime , the odds are unfortunately good that you will also . Most cancer policys ' also have a wellness provision that will reimburse the insured if they have a mammogram or a pap test or other cancer related tests done , even if they have health insurance coverage . One company , Allstate Benefits , expanded their cancer wellness program to cover blood tests for cholesteral , chest xrays , EKG 's and other non cancer related tests . generally these reimbursements have maximum amounts that they will pay on an annual basis .
Cancer insurance is very important , Cancer is anepidemic . half of al men and a three of all women will get some form of cancer in their life time . The good news is that thanks to advances inmodernmedicine , many people aresurviving then every before . The bad news , Cancer oftens bankrupts survivors . Remembermajor medical plans or Medicare covers most but not all of your cancer treatment . But you will have significant out of pocket expenses from deductibles and coinsurance which can be paid by a good cancer plan . . More importantly to consider is the lost of income due to the sickness , Cancer treatments likechemotherapy , cancermedication and thediseaseit 's self takes a great toll on the body , leaving suffers unable to work or forcing them to reduce their workschedulesto take care of themselves and recover.You medical insurance will not provide you with money to pay your personal expenseslikemortgage , food orutilities supplemental cancer plans that pay cash to their policy holders like Afalc , give you money to cover these expenses .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
There are three ways to answer this question . 1 -RRB- If applying for a new policy while having cancer , it is difficult to find a Term policy that will cover the cancer patient until cancer treatments have ended for at least a year . There are a few policies with graded benefits that will do so . The possibility of getting traditional Term life insurance grows as the time grows that the cancer is in remission . 2 -RRB- If applying for a Term policy with no history or signs or cancer , and just wondering if the policy would cover cancer in the future , yes , it would . 3 -RRB- If owning an existing Term life insurance policy and then being diagnosed with cancer , the policy will cover it .
There is one type of life insurance that you can get while having any type of cancer , and that is called Guaranteed Life Insurance . It is not available at every age , and it is graded for 2 or more years . But it does not have any health requirements . You can also purchase pre-need policies at a funeral home while having cancer . With those , the graded period is usually one year . If your cancer was caught in the early stages and has a good prognosis , you should be able to get a policy other than guaranteed issue about a year or two after the last treatment . Some types of policies will add a flat extra that drops off after a few years . Others add table ratings to the policy . It all depends on the type of cancer , the stage , how well it responded to treatment , how long ago you were diagnosed and last treated , and whether your cancer recurred or not . Finding life insurance for persons with cancer can be complicated . Contacting an impaired risk life insurance specialist is helpful to find your best rate .
If you have purchased the life insurance prior to being diagnosed with breast cancer , yes you are covered . If you have had breast cancer and looking to purchase life insurance there are some things you need to know . The type , amount and terms depends on the cancer itselfand how long you have been cancer free after your last treatment . To get into the standard ratings after breast cancer practically all carriers will want to see you cancer free for 10 years . Anything less than10 yearswill be a higher risk policy of either rated premiums or graduated benefits . Good luck .
Life insurance does cover death by cancer . However , it is common for someone diagnosed with cancer to seek out a life insurance policy , and at that point in time it is very difficult to obtain coverage . It generally takes at least a couple of years to obtain a medically underwritten policy after a cancer diagnosis , especially if over stage 2 . Of course , it also depends on the type of cancer , treatment needed , and effectiveness of the treatment . If a policy is issued , it generally is graded for 1-3 years , so that only a small amount is paid out if death occurs during that time . If the policyholder outlives the graded period . the policy pays the full face amount . As with every health condition , it is best to get your life insurance before a serious diagnosis . But whereas some health conditions cause your rates to go up more the longer you have it , the good news with cancer is that the longer you are in remission , the lower your rates usually go . So get what you can , and then keep trying every few years to get something lower priced . You will find that there are life insurance agents rooting for you , and who will work hard to help you get the best rate possible .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is A 30 Year Term Life Insurance ?
Just what it says , it is a term life insurance policy that will expire in 30 years . After 30 years , you will either have to renew the policy at a higher rate if it is renewable or convert the policy to a permanent plan such as whole life if it is convertible .
A 30 year Term Life Insurance policy will usually renew each year at the same premium , for a 30 year continuous time period . This is also referred to as a 30 year level term . If the policy remains in force during that time period , at the 31 ` st year , the premium will balloon to a much higher rate . Check to see if you have a guaranteed conversion option that would allow you to convert the coverage to a permanent plan in order to take advantage of the increased benefits that such a policy can provide .
I would not say that whole life is better than term life . It really depends on the clients need for life insurance . Whole life insurance name is literal , it is a face amount of life insurance that will last your whole life at a fixed premium . It is typically more expensive than term when your young therefore the face amount is typically less than a term insurance counter part . It is however much more affordable in later years because of the fixed rate . Term life insurance is typically more affordable in younger years with a fixed time period of level premiums such as 5-10-15-20-30-35 years . Term life insurance is used to cover a time period of debt such a mortgage . For example you purchase a home with a $ 250,000 mortgage for 30 years . It would be prudent to purchase a $ 250,000 30 year term policy as well . Try to avoid mortgage life insurance unless you are uninsurable . This term is known as decreasing term life and reduces as the mortgage is repaid . With straight term life , your loved ones will receive the difference of the face amount instead of the insurance company .
Knowing what life insurance term you should get is something you can best discern for yourself , when you understand how term life insurance is priced . When you purchase a term life insurance policy , you are usually locking in the premium so that it will not go up for a certain number of years . This can be as short as one year or as long as 30 + years . When you choose a longer term , you will find the price is much higher than the premium for a shorter term . That is because the policy is covering a greater risk as you get older . E.g. . If you are age 40 now and take out a 10 year term policy , that policy is only covering you to age 50 . If you take out a 30 year term policy , it is covering you to age 70 . The chance of your dying at age 70 is much greater than at age 50 . And life insurance costs are higher where there is greater risk of death . Term policies roughly average out the cost of insurance for each year you have the policy , and charge you that same price for the entire term . So in the first years of the policy , you are paying more than a person your age would be paying for that risk . In the latter years , you are paying less than a person that age would normally be paying . The advantage to longer terms really shows up when health is taken into account . You may have no trouble getting a preferred rating at age 40 . But to get rated preferred at age 50 or 60 is not as likely . Therefore , having a preferred rating locked in for 30 years offers a huge price advantage to the poor soul who gets rated preferred for a 10 year term policy at age 40 , standard at age 50 , and table 4 at age 60 . Getting longer terms is not for everyone . If you definitely only have a short term need , there is no reason to pay the higher cost of a longer term policy . But IF there is a chance you may need longer coverage , as you can see , locking it in while you are healthy is never a bad idea .
A Term life insurance policy is one that will have the same premium for a set number of the years in the term . Some Term life insurance will guarantee that the premium will not go up for the entire term ; other Term life insurance will guarantee that the premium can not go up for part of the term . E.g. 30 year Term life may be guaranteed not to go up in price for the full 30 years , or it can be guaranteed not to go up for 20 of the 30 years and `` hope '' that it wo n't go up the last 10 years . Term life insurance does not have any cash value . If you quit paying on Term life , it will end after one month .
A Return of Premium Life Insurance policy will pay back all the premiums you paid in if you are still alive when the years of the term are ended . E.g. if you took out a $ 250,000 thirty year term policy on your 40th birthday with an annual premium of $ 500 , on your 70th birthday you would get a tax free check for $ 15,000 -LRB- the policy may exclude paying back policy fees or other minor variations , but that is the gist of it -RRB- . You could keep the cash or may even be able to roll the $ 15,000 over into a single premium permanent policy with a higher value . In this example , you could have had a $ 250,000 term policy to cover a 30 year mortgage , and if you had passed in that 30 years , your house would have been paid off . But if you outlive the 30 year term , you still end up with a final expense fund or policy . Return of Premium -LRB- ROP -RRB- term often will pay back part of the premiums paid in if the policy is kept for a shorter period than the entire term , as well . The initial price for ROP Term is higher than for regular Term life insurance . And , contrary to the premiums for regular Term insurance -LRB- which are usually higher the longer the term -RRB- , ROP Term policies usually cost LESS the longer the term is . That is because the insurance company hangs onto your money longer and thus is able to return more to you after those years have passed .
When you buy life insurance to cover a mortgage , you can buy your policy in the face amount and term length that you want . Often , that is 30 year term to cover a 30 year mortgage . About 20 years down the road you may have half your mortgage paid off . At that time you could reduce your life insurance policy to half the face amount and save some money . Or you could start out taking half of your coverage in 30 year Term and half in 20 year Term . Buying the shorter term policy will save you some money and when it runs out , you still have 10 years of coverage left . All this is to say , you really ca n't know how much mortgage life insurance costs until you talk to an agent and figure out the best way to set up your policy . Give someone who sells level Term life insurance today ; you will be glad you took the time .
Term length in life insurance means the number of years that the policy will stay in effect at the same premium . E.g. . A 10 year Term policy will stay at the same price for 10 years ; a 30 year Term policy is assumed to stay at the same price for 30 years . However , some policies will guarantee that the premium stays the same for part of the term and does not guarantee that it will stay the same for the remainder of the term . It is important to make sure that your premium is guaranteed not to go up for the entire term , whether that be 10 , 20 , 30 years or some other term length .
By life insurance money , I assume that you mean the money the insurance company pays to your beneficiary ? It comes from your and everyone else 's premiums . Think about it . If one thousand young healthy 30-year olds buy a 30-year level term life insurance policy , all of them pay premiums for 30-years . But how many of them do you think will actually die during that 30-years ? One or two of them . Those are the only ones that will get anything back from the insurance company . The premiums from all 1,000 times 30-years will pay the death benefit for the one or two that die .
For most budget conscience consumers , 30 year term life insurance with a conversion provision is the best bang for the buck on affordable life insurance . I choose 30 years because many consumers have mortgagees that last that long . I recommend term insurance with conversion provisions to maintain the option to convert to permanent life insurance if its deemed necessary . Make sure the permanent policies are worth converting to before you purchase term life insurance . Remember , the key issue is affordability . Guaranteed term life insurance can be purchased for guaranteed periods starting at 5 to 30 years . Guaranteed term life insurance with convertibility is more than likely the best option for most .
First you have to understand what Term Life Insurance is . Term Life Insurance is Life Insurance covering you for a specific period of time . The common `` terms '' are 10-15-20-25-30 years . Term Insurance is also the least expensive of all Life Insurance , at least initially . Understanding this , people get Term Life Insurance for several reasons including ; mortgage coverage , other loans , family protection while the kids are home , providing replacement of income if death occurs during working years . The idea is providing protection for a period of time which will replace income or debt if death occurs prematurely . Example , for your mortgage , if you have a 30 year mortgage , with a 30 year term , death occurs before the mortgage is paid off , then the death benefit can be used to pay the outstanding balance . If kids are at home , growing up , you want to make sure they can have all the opportunities available to them even if the `` bread winner '' passes prematurely . All Life Insurance provides financial security when death occurs . If you have any other questions or need a quote , do not hesitate to contact me . Thank you .
It generally does not expire at an exact age and most people wont keep a term policy past the term premium guarantee period . The premium guarantee period on a traditional term life insurance policy will last until your term period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 30 year term policy , the premium will remain fixed and guaranteed for 30 years -RRB- . When the term period expires , the policy changes to annual renewable term insurance and the premium will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- - this can generally be continued up to age 95 on most policies . However , the premiums that would be needed to continue the coverage will be SUBSTANTIALLY higher than what you were paying before and will only go up and up . Term policies on a UL chassis may keep the premiums the same past the term guarantee period , but rather than the premium increasing , the death benefit will decrease each year - can vary by company . Another type of term insurance is banded coverage - meaning premiums will increase every 5 years as you hit the next age bracket . These are generally term insurance to a specific age - generally up to either 80 or 90 . If you live past the designated max age , the coverage will cease immediately -LRB- if kept that long -RRB- - supplementing your term coverage with permanent coverage can be of great value .
Term Life is a non-cash value life insurance plan that can be used very effectively for financial planning matching the policy to 10 year objectives , 20 year objectives , or 30 year objectives . When term life was first introduced it was justified by `` buy term and invest the difference '' . In other words save money by buying term and then select an aggressive growth mutual fund or if you prefer a savings account and when the term has expired for the purpose of the `` term life policy '' you do not want to have to buy term again because now you will be 10 , 20 , or 30 years older and since buying life insurance is a factor of what is the liklihood of your deatn I am sure you understand the older we get the higher the risk of our death
Term life insurance is intended to cover needs that have a set time period . E.g. . A 30 year mortgage can be protected by purchasing a 30 year Term life insurance policy . So you can determine how much Term life insurance you should have by looking at the need to be covered . E.g. if your mortgage is for $ 200,000 , taking out a 30 year Term policy of $ 250,000 -LRB- enough to cover the mortgage plus misc other expenses that would be incurred upon death -RRB- would be a good amount to purchase for that particular need . Figuring this out for each temporary need , then lumping them together in the length of policy needed , can be a cost effective way to buy Term life insurance .
Here are a few of the 30 year guaranteed term life insurance companies : American General , American National , Ameritas , Aviva , Banner , Lincoln Benefit , Lincoln National , MetLife Investors , Nationwide , Principal , Protective , Pruco , Savings Bank , Security MTlNY , Transmerica , United Omaha . There are other companies who have guaranteed universal life that can be configured to perform like a 30 year term life insurance . Keep in mind that there are age limitations to 30 year guaranteed term life insurance .
There is no such thing as best life insurance to buy . It all depends on your need and your stage in life . If you are in your 20s and 30s then a whole life policy may be appropriate since it tends to be more affordable in this state of your life . In your 40s and 50s a 30 year term may make much sense when a retirement investment is also created to parallel to term life so that if the policy expires in your 70s or 80s , your retirement savings will take care of burial cost in the invent of death . Remember always contact your financial advisor before you act . One thing to remember about whole life is that your premium goes to two places : Insurance and investment . Lets say you are paying $ 160 per month for whole life policy . $ 100 may go towards your insurance and $ 60 may into an investment account that yields some interest . Let say you purchased a face amount $ 500,000 and you were aged 30 when you bought it . Forty years latter at age 70 your saving has generated about $ 400,000 . If you die , your beneficiary will receive the insurance face amount of $ 500,000 but not the $ 400,000 in saving/investment account , That amount remains with the insurance company . You can withdraw your $ 400,000 as a loan while you are alive and has to paid back to the insurance company . If it is not paid then your insurance face amount will be reduced by loan balance upon your death . In short your beneficiary will receive $ 100,000 upon your death . Term life insures you only for a fix number of years usually 10,20 or 30 and policy expires or renews at a much higher rate You may also become un insurable at policy expiration . Remember to talk to your financial adviser
This answer will vary greatly but a person should get life insurance as soon as possible . The younger you are the lower the premium for the rest of the term on the policy . For example if you are 18 years old you can get a whole life policy for $ 250,000 and will have a premium around $ 50.00 per month for the rest of your life and it will build cash value and allow you to borrow against the policy . Now a term life insurance product is much less but if you get a 30 year term for around $ 18.00 per month but then in 30 years if you are still living , hopefully , your insurance will run out and you will have to purchase a new plan and it will now cost you $ 153 for $ 250,000 whole life policy and for another 30 year term it will cost around $ 65.00 per month . So as you can see the longer you wait the more you will pay for your insurance and even worse is if something were to happen to you and you were without insurance then what would your family do without it . For more information please visit WEBSITELINK
Term life insurance goes up in price after the years for which the guaranteed premium have been completed . E.g. . If you took out a 30 year policy at age 30 and it was guaranteed not to go up in price for the full 30 years , it would go up at age 60 . If the policy was guaranteed not to go up for 20 of the 30 years , there is a chance that it could go up at age 50 .
Guaranteed level term life insurance is life insurance that is guaranteed not to go up in price , or down in death benefit , for the entire term . E.g. . If you took out a guaranteed level term life insurance policy of $ 1,000,000 in 30 year term at a rate of $ 100/month at age 31 , you would be paying the same rate at age 60 as you were at age 30 . If you passed away during those 30 years , your beneficiary would receive the full $ 1,000,000 .
Think carefully before you cancel Term life insurance , because rarely can you purchase a new Term policy that costs the same or less than the one you already have . E.g If you drop a 30 year term policy at year 20 and get a new 10 year policy , you would probably pay more for the 10 year policy than if you continued paying on your 30 year term for the last 10 years . Only cancel your existing term insurance if you are sure you no longer need it .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Are The Best Ways For Someone Under 30 To Start Planning For Retirement ?
First , take care of your risks - health insurance , car insurance , home/renters insurance , life insurance . Second , you need a stash of emergency cash . I make it rhyme so it 's easy to remember . $ 1,000 - $ 2,000 is a good start . Get a safe & start sticking it in there . Crap happens - someone in India wipes out your account and it takes a week or two to get the bank to give you back your money . Third , open a savings account and save at least three months of your household expenses but six months is better . Again , crap happens and if you have to change jobs , you may need a 3-6 month cushion to find another job . Fourth , max out your company 's 401k to the extent of the company matching . That means for every dollar you put in , you DOUBLE your money guaranteed . Fifth , this is where you get into long term financial planning . Do some networking , attend some seminars , ask friends . I personally like mutual funds & annuities but everyone will give you different answers . Find a plan that meets your risk tolerance and a company you trust . You will hear a lot of noise about fees but keep it in perspective - are you getting what you pay for ? It 's not like gasoline where you get the same gas no matter where you fill up so always look for the cheapest . Different products offer different services for different fees .
This is a great question . . one that shows that you thinking ahead ! There are many options to consider , as there is no one right answer . You may wish to speak with a `` fee only '' financial advisor who can help you with your planning and review your options . Life insurance agents and investment advisors may have their own agendas . Each should be able to answer specific questions you have regarding their products and applicability in retirement planning . Each has appropriate products . Diversity is always a good idea . Remember that disability insurance , which will protect your income during your saving years , is vitally important .
I will answer this question as a dad . First , take the advice of one of the richest men in the world , Warren Buffet . His advice Rule 1 `` do n't lose '' . Rule 2 `` refer to rule 1 '' . So cover your ass-etts first , buy yourself some decent insurance . if a calamity befalls you , you will not be financially out of the game . Somebody will suffer the calamity . It may be you . 1 . For free life insurance advice , go to www.lfehappens.org and figure out how much you need now . Then buy it . Today . You are not bulletproof . You likely have a friend your age that has died . No second chance . 2 . Car insurance . Since the average SUV you might hit costs lots more than the minimum coverages , do n't get minimum liability coverage . If you hit someone , and have less coverage than what you hit , you may end up paying for the rest of the SUV you hit out of pocket . While I am on it , buy a car you can afford to lose . Pay cash if you can . Cars are just the cost of getting to work . By paying cash , you can save 4,000 a year or more . A nice little pile . Remember : We fly around all day in 30 year old airliners . Airlines maintain their planes meticulously . Maintain your vehicle and it will last . Fall in love with your spouse and your children , not your car . 3 . Furniture , clothes , and other things do not go up in value . Pay cash for items that do not go up in value . If you ca n't pay cash , you ca n't afford it . Goodwill is open in every city . They always have some nice things . 4 . You do not need cable or Satellite . Netflix is 1/10th the cost . Save 1000.00 a year . 5 . Pack a lunch . You can go on a nice vacation with the 2,500.00 or so you will save over the year by not buying a 10.00 lunch . 6 . Do you really need the latest cell phone and unlimited data plan ? No , I did n't think so . 7 . Little piles make big piles . Only when you have saved something can you plan for retirement . The easiest way to make a good retirement possible is to cover your losses , and spend less . Once you have saved your backside risk and saved some capital , how you allocate your funds is less important than the discipline to do it . What gets watched grows in your life . Keep track of your money , using www.mint.com or some other software , and it will grow . when you have big piles , you will by then have the knowledge of how to keep the money working . Let me say it again . Little piles make big piles . Be disciplined . Do so , and you will be comfortable in retirement . I have faith in you . - dad
The easiest answer is to `` do something '' . Save something . If your employer does n't provide a 401K match , open up a Roth IRA and make regular , periodic deposits to the account . An IRA or non-qualified annuity are fine too . If you are in business and have no employees , open up a SEP -LRB- simplified employer pension -RRB- . All of the latter have limits to the contributions and eligibility . You should consider setting aside your retirement contribution before you spend on anything else . I suggest saving 10-20 % , with half of these funds liquid in demand savings accounts but only to the point you have enough on hand to equal 6 months of your living expenses . Then move more of the money into a tax preferred account until you max out your contribution limits . You can use life insurance as an asset accumulation vehicle as well and as you age you may be able to violate the TAMRA and turn the policies into modified endowment contracts that can become cash cows you fatten up for the future . Do n't forget variable and fixed index accounts , and mutual funds and stock index accounts . This should give you enough food for research but I 'd start with safe accounts and build out with an eye on avoiding the ravages of taxation until the government says you have met the limits of the tax preferenced acounts . Good luck . Oh , by the way , the longer you wait to start the harder it will be to accomplish money enough for retirement . I can prove mathematically that someone who starts today and maximizes their contributions for ten years can not be eclipsed by someone waiting for ten years and starting the same process even if you quit and all other factors are equal . It 's true , so , get started and good luck . You may be relying upon yourself more in retirement than you know today .
What are the best ways for someone under 30 to start planning for retirement ? Well first get out of the planning phase and start the doing phase . Getting the habit of saving going is the best thing you can do for yourself . Time is the most important and actually cheapest thing you can invest . People say they will start saving when they pay off debt , but most people will carry some sort of debt throughout their working lives and beyond . Save and pay down debt . Getting the habit early means actually using less money . The advantage of starting early is that you can do several things over time with different risk and reward profiles . You have time to pick and use safe , moderate and high risk investments because time works in your favor . Waiting until your older actually forces you into more risk situations as you try and make up for time by choosing higher risk investments because you need a high return . Getting started young , building your safety net allows you to take some risk because you have a fall back position , not a desperation position .
Under 30 retirement planning ! Great ! And the answers above are all good . One thing I did n't notice in the above answers was that Whole Life insurance can be your best start all around . Whole life builds cash value that can be used for retirement income . Of course if you 're married and or have children the life insurance itself is a protection for your family in case you die . And before anything else you need that protection . So even if you are n't married or have kids and never are or do , whole life has Guaranteed cash value growth that you do n't get with other investments , so you can count on it . And you do n't pay income tax on the growth ! And if you do the smart thing and buy whole life from a Mutual company you can also have dividends added to your cash value while at the same time buying more insurance - without ever having to have another medical exam ! Then in retirement you can have the cash value paid to you monthly , quarterly or annually to supplement whatever else you have for retirement income .
I love that you are thinking ahead - good job ! Planning for retirement is so important and unfortunately too many young people are not thinking about it yet . There are many steps you can take to put a retirement savings plan together . As mentioned above , 401k and IRA are great vehicles for building retirement savings accounts . Of course , learning healthy savings habits is going to benefit you in the long run . Doing so will make you eligible to obtain an annuity as an additional retirement planning tool that will provide you with a series of payments you can not outlive . Another strong piece of advice for planning your future security - get a life insurance policy . Yes , now . It 's great if you have life insurance as a benefit through your employer HOWEVER , it is so important to have at least some whole life coverage that you own , in your name . Be sure to read the fine print of your work 's life insurance . Also , be aware that your employer can change or take away that coverage at anytime . Qualifying for life insurance at a young age means you will be locked into the lowest rate available to you . The older you get , the more at risk you become and the more you will be paying . There are many different types of policies so be sure to speak to your agent to find what is best for your needs . Good luck !
Diversification is the key . The 401 and Roth plans are still solid performers ... but you might want to look at annuities and IUL products . IUL products usually outperform the 401 k products over time and put more cash in the pocket . North American is someone to talk to that comes to mind .
In a phrase , comit to putting a set amount of money into an account each month . That said , check to see if your employer has a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which you can start contributing to , especially up to what the employer is matching . If this is not available then next I would recommend setting up a Roth IRA . Now , the next big question is who to go to in order to set these up ? If you are using the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , then work through your employer . If you are setting something up outside of the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , then you might look to working with a registered representative who can give you accurate information on an investment which suites your needs the best . Let me know if you have any other questions .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
What are the best ways for someone under 30 to start planning for retirement ? Well first get out of the planning phase and start the doing phase . Getting the habit of saving going is the best thing you can do for yourself . Time is the most important and actually cheapest thing you can invest . People say they will start saving when they pay off debt , but most people will carry some sort of debt throughout their working lives and beyond . Save and pay down debt . Getting the habit early means actually using less money . The advantage of starting early is that you can do several things over time with different risk and reward profiles . You have time to pick and use safe , moderate and high risk investments because time works in your favor . Waiting until your older actually forces you into more risk situations as you try and make up for time by choosing higher risk investments because you need a high return . Getting started young , building your safety net allows you to take some risk because you have a fall back position , not a desperation position .
Thirty years certainly could be enough to save for retirement . The total amount you need to save in today 's dollars depends largely on what retirement success means to you . Once you have a basic idea , you can determine what is needed to fund your desired lifestyle . Deciding what you want to do 30 years from now is quite difficult so using the `` standard '' 70 % of current income is a good starting point . Once you are within 10-15 years , you should start fine tuning your retirement plan to get things aligned . NOTE : The rule of compound interest 72 interest rate = the number of years it takes for the funds to double . For example 72 10 % = 7.2 . That means at 10 % interest your money doubles every 7.2 years . Therefore , the earlier you start the better . More information on what you ought to know about protecting and growing your Nest Egg can be found at WEBSITELINK If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
It sounds cliche , but you should start saving for retirement as soon as you start working . With longer life expectancies we are now living 20 , 30 even 40 years into retirement . Allowing the power of compound interest to work for you means the sooner you start the bigger your Nest Egg will be . Within 10 to 15 years of retirement , positioning for growth and protection is even more important . Since you would have less time to recover from a drop . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The easiest answer is to `` do something '' . Save something . If your employer does n't provide a 401K match , open up a Roth IRA and make regular , periodic deposits to the account . An IRA or non-qualified annuity are fine too . If you are in business and have no employees , open up a SEP -LRB- simplified employer pension -RRB- . All of the latter have limits to the contributions and eligibility . You should consider setting aside your retirement contribution before you spend on anything else . I suggest saving 10-20 % , with half of these funds liquid in demand savings accounts but only to the point you have enough on hand to equal 6 months of your living expenses . Then move more of the money into a tax preferred account until you max out your contribution limits . You can use life insurance as an asset accumulation vehicle as well and as you age you may be able to violate the TAMRA and turn the policies into modified endowment contracts that can become cash cows you fatten up for the future . Do n't forget variable and fixed index accounts , and mutual funds and stock index accounts . This should give you enough food for research but I 'd start with safe accounts and build out with an eye on avoiding the ravages of taxation until the government says you have met the limits of the tax preferenced acounts . Good luck . Oh , by the way , the longer you wait to start the harder it will be to accomplish money enough for retirement . I can prove mathematically that someone who starts today and maximizes their contributions for ten years can not be eclipsed by someone waiting for ten years and starting the same process even if you quit and all other factors are equal . It 's true , so , get started and good luck . You may be relying upon yourself more in retirement than you know today .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will A Home Insurance Claim Increase My Premium ?
Depending on the claim , one claim should not affect your premium . A history of a lot of small claims or a large liability claim may affect your premium depending on the circumstances . Each company looks at things differently so it is hard to give a definitive answer to your question .
There are several factors that can increase premium in a homeowners insurance policy . One could be the cost of construction . Since the home must be insured with enough dwelling coverage to cover the home in a total loss you my see an increase in dwelling coverage thereby an increase in premium . Also age of the home can be a factor . In brand new homes most insurance carriers give big discounts for up to 10 years . As the home ages the discount diminishes until gone . Generally all other factors aside the home can remain in a stable position until the home becomes around 30 yrs old which can at that time start increasing premium do to the risk increasing . Another factor is just a rate change by the carrier mostly due to high losses in any given area . And of course your claims history is a factor .
-- > Normal 0 Whether anyone wants to admit it or not , insurance consumers tend to seek ways to reduce their insurance expenses while insurance providers are always looking for ways to increase their revenue . A rate increase is one alternative insurers might use to increase your premium but more often than not your premium frequently increases for other reasons . An insurer 's base rates are only one factor that goes into the calculation of your actual insurance premium . You should know what those factors are . The most common factor may be an increase in your amount of insurance . Your insurance company may claim construction costs in your area have increased and your amounts of insurance have been increased accordingly . That may be true but higher limits do n't always mean higher premiums . Discounts they may have applied in prior years may have changed or been discontinued . Penalties may have been applied if you had a claim or your credit score has changed . Rate categories may change as your home gets older . The reasons can be endless . But that doesnt mean you have to simply accept the increase . Question the reason for any increase . Determine if you are eligible for other discounts or credits . Consider other insurers who might offer you more favorable premium treatment . In my experience , insurers rates dont change all that often , and they can go up or down . Other factors used to calculate your final premium are usually the reason you see your premiums go up so often . Be proactive , a little effort and a few questions could save you a lot of money .
If the cost of auto repairs hasnt increased and damages awarded in lawsuits hasnt increased , auto insurance probably shouldnt increase . Your state insurance commissioner keeps a close eye on insurance cost in your states . He does this for two reasons . The first is to make sure that the public isnt being charged too much and the second is to make sure that the insurance companies are taking in sufficient money to honor all of the promises that they have made . The real cost of automobile insurance is determined when you have a claim . If the policy limit is exceeded and angry people are suing you , you paid too much for your insurance . If your policy had high limits and took care of everything , then you bought cheap insurance . Having to settle a claim out of your own pocket is the most expensive form of insurance that you can purchase . The reason that insurance premiums increase is that the company pays out more than it can afford to pay out . It is a simple balance sheet calculation . When the company finds that they are paying out more in claims than they are receiving in premiums they file with the state insurance commissioner to review and adjust rates in your state . Several things cause the claims experience of a company to increase . It could be that the frequency of claims increases . This could be the result of reduced safety enforcement , poorer road conditions or a variety of other causes . It could be that the severity of claims has increased . This would be the result of an increasing number of accidents turning into lawsuits . It also could be caused by juries making increasingly high awards to those injured in accidents . It also could be the result of increased medical costs in your area . Another factor could be the cost of auto repairs . Materials and parts tend to become more expensive over time and this could affect the claims experience of a company . It is important to note that most companies in the state will feel similar pressure at the same time as those factors affect all the companies . There are moral factors that also come to affect the premiums of auto insurance . When drivers report fewer annual miles than they actually drive , that increases their exposure without increasing the premium for their policy . If people allow other drivers to operate their vehicles without adequate supervision of screening risky drivers could be populating the streets . Even though your state requires that vehicles be insured we all know that some are not and that expense has to be shared somewhere . A frequent abuse is the pizza delivery man who is driving the family sedan . His insurance policy never knew he was doing that and has a risk that hasnt been properly evaluated . There are far more lurid cases but my all-time favorite is the family sedan that has steel tanks welded underneath the body to carry illegal liquor . All these moral issues also affect the premium .
-- > Normal 0 Im sure your insurance company would say yes to that question and I would say most homeowners will find their premium does increase each year . Usually there are two reasons . Insurers increase their rates and insurers tend to increase the amount of insurance on your home by inflationary factors tied to increased construction costs in your area . But that doesnt mean your premium has to increase every year , it means it may be time to take a closer look at your policy and premium . If you want your policy to pay to rebuild your home if it is destroyed and the cost to rebuild your home has increased , increasing the amount of insurance may be appropriate . But increasing the amount of insurance does not necessarily mean your premium must increase . You may be entitled to additional credits for not filing any claims , structural updates or improvements or added security . Maybe your credit score has improved and you are eligible for more favorable rating treatment . You may even want to check with other insurers to see if they offer more favorable terms . But bottom line , there is no reason your homeowners insurance premium should go up each year . You just have to take a look at it , find out why and see what your alternatives are .
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
There are several different reasons home insurance rates increase . Most carriers would probably tell you that at least a portion of their increases are linked to weather/natural disaster related claims increases over the past few years . I often hear from clients in Wisconsin -LRB- our location -RRB- thinking they should not have to pay more for insurance due to the carrier having more lossesfrom fires out west , or hurricanes on the coast.Clients say they did not have a claim so why should they pay more?This debate will rage on but I doubt much will change . Insurance carriers are a business and when they pay out more in claims , due to bad weather or what have you , they have to make up for the difference ; increasing premiums . They spread risk around to remain competetive , trying to balance out higher risk states/locationswith lower risk states/locations . Average premiums on a state to state level often reflect this -LRB- for example , Florida is often ranked number one for premium cost primarily due to the high risk of weather related claims -RRB- . Another common reason carriers provide for increasing prmeiumsis to keep pace with inflation , many policies offer inflation guard to keep pace with estimated values . What is the take away here ? Home insurance is WORTH IT ! Protect your home and investment , likely your most expensive one ! Talk to an independent agent today !
Homeowners Insurance is a contract whereby a homeowner transfers his/her risk to an insurance carrier in return for a contract and a small premium . Homeowners Insurance Premium will usually increase from year to year ; however , by chance a decrease may be seen once in a while . Insurance companies increase the Dwelling Coverage each year to keep up with the increasing cost of reconstruction ; after all , homeowners insurance 's primary purpose is to rebuild a home in the unfortunate event of a total loss . The small increase of dwelling coverage each year is usually the purpose that draws attention when the premium rises ; however , this is very insignificant . Insurance companies are audited each year and are obligated to comply with State Department of Insurance regulations in each and every State where they underwrite risk . Each year , insurance carriers calculate the necessary premium to maintain a safe financial condition and offer security to all homes insured ; the largest reason for premium increase would be ` loss experience ' during the prior year , another reason may be due to increased operational cost including but definitely not limited to reinsurance premium paid . Insurance Companies either have an internal actuarial department or hire an independent actuarial firm who are charged with the responsibility of calculating premium based on underwriting factors and prior loss data . For this reason , carriers only offer annual policies and are unable to predict risk on a longer term basis . Since carriers experience different loss results each and every year , insurance rates and increase percentages are never the same from one year to the next . Since paid losses continue to grow , claim frequency is showing growth and litigation is becoming more commonplace , insurance companies raise premium to keep up with the outflow of payments . It is important to recognize that claims and operational expenses are paid from the pool of collected policy premium . For a more detailed explanation or financial report from your current carrier , contact your carrier representative to receive a report . Also , data is available as published by the Department of Insurance in most States .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
There are many companies out there and each one of them can treat a claim differently if you are asking will my rate go up . There are different types of claims that can trigger an automatic rate increase on renewal with most companies such as a water Claim -LRB- non flood -RRB- , a theft or a fire . Many companies do not increase premium if the claim is below a certain amount or threshold but you must check with your agent and carrier to be sure . Weather claims in many cases do not trigger increase in premiums but you must check with your agent and company . If you have a weather event and you are not sure if you have damage many roof and siding companies will come out and give you a free bid before you decide to call in the claim . Call your agent and discuss with them thescenarioand get advice so you can make a sound decision . Most companies do not have a problem with a homeowner with 1 claim in 3 years , but if you have more than that you could be considered a habitual claimant -LRB- even though the claims may not have been in your control -RRB- . Find an agent or agency that you can trust and do not be afraid to ask questions that come to mind . Do not find out if you have coverage for a claim after the fact and make sure your questions are answered . Keep in mind that the insurance you are purchasing is to help protect you from a financial loss so ask questions , try to get the best package and coverage that fits your family needs and then look at price .
There are many reasons why a home insurance policy would increase . Homes are insured for replacement of dwelling or in other words , what does it cost to build . If cost of construction and materials increases then replacement cost will increase which means your dwelling amount , or the amount to insure increases , which of course causes an increase in premium . Other factors could be regional rate adjustment do to losses . Also age of your home could be a factor . Claims you may have made could be a factor . Did you un-package your auto policy from your home could be a factor . There are many factors which should be discussed with your agent to determine premium changes and what if anything can be done to adjust the rate .
I have an in ground pool in my own back yard and we absolutely love it . It 's great being the house that all my kids ' friends want to go to . But , does it increase my insurance premiums ? Not necessarily , although it probably should . I 'll explain why in just a moment . First , let 's look at what an insurance company wants if you do have a pool . The biggest thing they want is a fenced enclosure around the entire pool . They want to be sure that anyone who enters the pool intended to enter the pool . Also to keep animals and small children from wandering into the pool . It 's usually not a case of a premium increase , it 's a yes or no question . If you do what they want -LRB- fence -RRB- , they 'll usually insure you with no increases . If you do n't do what they want , they 'll just refuse to insure you . Now , why would your premium increase ? Because a pool brings more liability along with it . Bad things can happen even if you take precautions . I would recommend liability limits of at least $ 500,000 and , usually at least a $ 1,000,000 umbrella policy . Doing this may cost you a little more but it 's well worth it . It may be as little as $ 85/year or it may be a little more depending on your home , cars , and family . Be smart , spend small dollars now to avoid big dollars later .
The key word in this question is `` cover '' . All life insurance can be used toward that purpose if the beneficiary chooses to use it that way . Policies can be made with a Funeral Home as the beneficiary but only one kind of policy will answer the question of `` will it cover '' . When I first entered the insurance profession in 1957 we sold a $ 1,000 or $ 2,000 ordinary -LRB- permanent , whole -RRB- life policy for a person wanting funeral expense coverage . As I increased my knowledge in the insurance industry I went to including a `` Final Expense '' amount in the practice of total planning of a persons insurance needs . At that time we figured $ 10,000 sufficient to meet the needs of final hospital expenses , taxes , burial , etc. . It was not until I was Executive Vice President of a company that was sold to a company that wrote burial insurance policies through the funeral home . I became licensed with the new company and learned , at a much older age , that there is only one policy that can REALLY say it will cover funeral costs at the persons death . That policy is available through funeral homes , it is an increasing whole life policy that the funeral home accepts for the purchase of a funeral at a specific time and then guarantees to give that equivalent funeral whenever the person dies without any further cost except some expense that might be beyond those spelled out in the contract . I began to teach classes for CE on this kind of policy for our state and for many insurance agencies . This is a completely different policy that can be of great benefit to a local independent agent working with a local funeral home . As I began to teach about this type of Life Insurance I found most Life Insurance agents had never heard of it or had been sold against it by companies writing supposed , last expense , death benefit policies . I have now written this type of policy for almost 20 years and the families of the deceased have nothing but praise for a properly planned REAL Funeral Policy . At 81 years old the death benefit of my funeral policy now exceeds the death benefit of the first policy I bought for total family protection . If I am blessed with a few more years it may equal what I used to think was a huge Life Insurance policy . I am still writing these policies on my friends . I have learned one thing over the years ! In the insurance business never close your mind to a type of policy until you have totally studied it yourself rather than being sold a bill of goods by a company that may not have the policy you are trying to learn about . Worry about that client , first and foremost , and do the best job you possibly can for that individual by increasing your knowledge of this business . I have covered some of the aspects of this policy in my recently published second edition of `` The Prophets Dollar '' , available on Amazon .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
Talk to your Insurance Professional about your Home Insurance policy and what specifically may cause the premium to increase in your case . In general , there are a number of factors that can contribute to a premium increase . For example , it is likely that your policy has an `` inflation guard '' provision that increases the dwelling amount provided each year . If the dwelling amount on your home increased over last year , that would certainly account for a premium increase . If you suffered a covered loss and had to file a claim , that might affect your renewal premium . If your area was hit with heavy weather related losses , like the ice daming that the North East and specificlally CT was plagued by , even if yo were not affected , your company might have had to take a rate adjustment as a result of the losses . Your Insurance professional wil be able to review your coverage and advise you not only as to why the policy may have increased , but also ways to save .
There are many factors that affect the rates for homeowners insurance : Homeowner -LRB- insured -RRB- - The insured 's age , credit rating , loss experience , prior coveragewill affect the premium charged for a homeowners policy . Home location - Location is a very big deal . For example , a home located on the coast will be subject to a much higher premium compared to the same home located far inland due to the increased possibility of loss from wind or storm damage . Likewise , a home located in an area that has excellent fire protection -LRB- very close proximity to a fire station -RRB- will have a lower premium than the same home located in a secluded location very far away from fire protection . Home Construction - A stick-built wood frame home is more expensive to insure than the same valued home constructed of fire-resistive materials due to the increased potential for catastrophic fire loss with the former . Coverage Limits - Obviously a $ 500,000 home will cost more to insure than a similarly located/constructed $ 200,000 home .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
The thing to kssp in mind with regard to virtually any type of insurance is that the premium charged by the insuring company reflects the risk they are insuring . If your Homeowners ' premium has gone up and you have not filed a claim , more than likely it is because your policy , like most , has a form of `` inflation guard '' built in . That is , each year , the amonut of coverage on the dwelling itself will increase by a certain percentage -LRB- in CT usually about 4 % -RRB- . The increase in coverage will result in an increase in premium . If you have suffered a loss and filed a claim , it is also possible that you are being charged a loss cost or as a result of the claim , have lost a claim free discount that you previously enjoyed . Talk to your insurance professional about increasing your deductible and also about taking advantage of any discounts that are available .
The funding source of paying disability claims depends on who is backing up the promise to do so . 1 . Social Security DI is funded by tax-payers 2 . State-sponsored DI -LRB- if available -RRB- is usually funded by employers within that state . -LRB- A sole-proprietor that constitutes a company of one person may be able to `` opt in '' to the program with special enrollment . -RRB- 3 . Individual - or corporate-owned DI is funded by an insurance company that collects premiums from the individual or corporation to form a `` pool '' of money from which claims are paid . In any of these cases , the funding source must have sufficient funds in the pool to pay out legitimate claims as they are submitted . Premiums reflect the justified cost of maintaining that fund at the proper level . Therefore , claims may require a company to submit an application to the State Department of Insurance for increasing premiumsfora specified `` block of business '' within which claims will - or already have - exceeded premiums coming in for that block . -LRB- An individual can not be singled out for premium increases . -RRB- If one owns a policy that is `` non-cancelable '' , that term means that the carrier can not increase premiums for any reason over the life of the policy .
You can always change insurance companies , there 's nothing to stop you . However , you may want to stick with what you have during a claim . Legally , an insurance company has to settle claims according to their policy whether you 're still insured with them or not . In practice , these are human beings working on your claim and they may not always give you consideration if you 've cancelled your coverage with them . Let 's look at an example . Let 's say you 've gotten into an accident and you 're car is in the body shop . You want OEM parts installed on your car , but the insurance company wants to use aftermarket parts because they cost less . They have more of an incentive to honor your request if you 're still insured with them because they see an opportunity to offset your claim with future premiums . Another factor to consider is the company you want to go to . They may not want to insure a car that has unrepaired damage . It 's totally up to the company . Now , in my experience , you would only ask the question if you do n't like how your claim is being handled . If you were totally satisfied , you would n't think about switching . My advice is to stay with your current company and negotiate with their claims department to get your claim settled to your satisfaction . Check your policy , all companies have an appeals process if you do n't agree with how your claim is being settled . Take advantage of it . You may get some consideration and a better settlement . If you 're still unsatisfied , you can always consider the courts , but this is a risky proposition unless you 're sure you 're in the right . After your claim is settled , you can explore new companies . A good agent will help you with claims if you 're not satisfied . They can not always ensure you 'll get what you want , but a good one will go to bat for you . In my opinion , finding the right advisor is the most important decision you make . In the long run , you 'll come out ahead even if they 're more expensive now . The cost of your coverage is n't just the premium , it 's what it costs you in time , money , and aggravation at claim time .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Why Purchase Disability Insurance ?
Why purchase Disability Insurance ? To replace part of your income in case you become disabled . Not everyone has the income or need to purchase Disability Insurance . You may be getting it from your employer already . Or perhaps your wages and assets are low enough that you would be better off going on Social Security or SSI if you suffered a permanent disability . For most workers , however , having Disability Insurance is a necessity as most families can not get along without one income .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
Why purchase Disability Insurance ? To replace part of your income in case you become disabled . Not everyone has the income or need to purchase Disability Insurance . You may be getting it from your employer already . Or perhaps your wages and assets are low enough that you would be better off going on Social Security or SSI if you suffered a permanent disability . For most workers , however , having Disability Insurance is a necessity as most families can not get along without one income .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
When do long term disability benefits end ? Well there are several possibilities where a long term disability policy ends . First , you get better and return to work . Second , the limits set by your choice when you purchased the policy . Finally , the definition of disability or type of disability can change within the policy and end it . This is why it is so important to read the definition of disability and if the definition changes during a disability .
When is not necessarily the best question to ask as to why to buy whole life insurance . If you know why you are purchasing insurance , that will help to determine your when . Most whole life policies pay out very little in dividends so I would look at other vehicles if you want dividends . Also , life insurance isa tax free vehicle when it pays out so consider that when you are looking at life insurance . To get to the root of the answer , most people purchase Whole Life policies as final expense policies because there is n't much of a reason to purchase Whole Life policies otherwise . The interest rate is dismal , dividends are not worth mentioning . The cost of a whole life policy can be affordable as to building up the savings or investment vehicle versus on your own . So , I would not purchase a whole life policy prior to age 50 .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Why get whole life insurance ? I ca n't give you a reason why you should , only why I did . I wanted a locked in price the day I bought it , till the day I died . I wanted something to work both if I died too early or lived too long . I wanted something I owned , that could not be taken away later on . I wanted to control the policy , not the insurance company . I wanted to take away an insurance company 's ability to say no to me . I wanted a safe place to put money to let it grow , to cover for my other investment choices . I wanted a place to access cash if needed , where I did n't have to explain to a guy in a cubicle `` why ? '' and get his blessing . If any of these reasons work for you , by all means consider the choice .
Anyone who has someone relying on them for financial support should have Disability Insurance . Becoming disabled for a period of time is not uncommon , and it can happen at any age . Very few families can get by on one income , and even single persons can lose their life 's savings through an extended disability . Becoming disabled generally does not just take away income for a period of months or years , it comes with medical bills and other extra expenses connected to the cause of disability . That is why anyone who makes and relies on making an income should buy Disability Insurance , in my opinion .
Why do n't people buy disability insurance ? Well , probably the biggest reason is they feel they have it through their employer . Most feel that workers industrial insurance -LRB- many different names -RRB- that protects them from on the job injury is enough . Except when they hurt themselves off the job or basically get sick . There 's sort of a willful ignorance when it comes to disability insurance as to why many never consider it . Call it income insurance and interest rises . Go figure ?
As a retirement planning specialist , I spend alot of time doing long term care planning . Why would I do this ? Because NOTHING will derail a person 's life-time savings faster than a custodial -LRB- AKA long term care -RRB- claim . There are two reasons why a person should purchase LTC ; the first is that they care about the quality of care , and having a say in where care will be provided , should they require it . The second reason is that they care about protecting the assets that they have acquired over the course of their life-time , and they want to protect those assets for their healthy spouse and/or children , rather then have those assets eaten up by impairment , or having them signed over to medicaid or a nursing home . As far as WHEN a person should purchase coverage ; my youngest clients are usually in their 40 's , and with them I usually recommend a hybrid life insurance-LTC product ; my average clients are in their mid 50 's to late 60 's , and for them I recommend either traditional long term care or a single premium policy with refund provisions , and my oldest clients are in their mid 70 's . I think the best time to purchase for most people is in their mid to late 50 's , because most will get better underwriting and a favorable premium . I hope this helps .
Term Life Insurance provides benefits only upon the death of the insured individual during the `` term '' . There are many reasons why a individual may chose to purchase a term policy instead of a whole life policy . The answer to your question is tied into the reasons why a individual purchased the coverage . Level Term Life Insurance policies generally have set periods of time -LRB- 10,20,30 years -RRB- where they will provide benefits , with level term premiums and benefits never change during the `` term '' or period of time that the individual is covered . There are also increasing/decreasing term life policies that are used to address different needs . The most common example would be a individual being contractually obligated to purchase decreasing term life when obtaining a mortgage . The policy would start out with death benefits equal to the mortgage , and decrease as the individual payed of the mortgage . The end result would be both the policy and the mortgage balance decreasing to $ 0 by the end of the period .
Why buy disability insurance ? Well the best reason to buy disability income insurance is to prevent you from going through all of your savings and assets if a disability situation arises in your life . You either have the money on hand or the ability to liquidate assets or you purchase insurance to protect what you have .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Regardless of what type of insurance , if you 're asking why it 's priced the way it is , the answer is always this : it 's based on the actuarial data . Why is life insurance less expensive for women ? Because the data shows they live longer than men . Why is short term insurance less expensive ? Actually , I do n't know the specific actuarial data , but my guess is that the likelihood of your using insurance within 6 months is far less than if you had the insurance for many years .
You can purchase Short Term Disability from a licensed agent in your state . You can also purchase it from an online agency . There are a few types to consider as well . Most will pay you for 3-6 months assuming you become disabled . There are also policies that will pay you your annual salary if you are unable to work for a year . These are generally less expensive than a traditional policy which is why clients buy them . Feel free to contact me with any additional questions !
Do I need Disability Insurance outside of my group plan is an excellent question . The answer , without looking at your policy is maybe . Here is why : Most of the group plans I see fall into one of two categories . The first is short term disability , the second is long term disability coverage . In many cases the employer will offer both but the employee only opts into one or the other . If you have short term DI , then my question is what happens if you are still disabled after that period which may only be up to 90 days or less ? If you have long-term DI , which kicks in after 6 months , 12 months , etc. what are you going to do before you start getting a benefit ? Last , statistically we know that people today will have 7 + jobs in there lifetime . This means , depending where you are , if you leave your job , whether voluntarily or not , these benefits do not follow you so consider getting something in place at minimum so you are not left hanging in the event of job loss . Remember , DI can only be applied for if you have a job . If you are not working , then you will not be able to get Disability Insurance . If you are unemployed , have a DI policy , get disabled , then you will still receive a benefit . Not a bad deal in this situation . Answer those questions I asked and you will answer for yourself what you should consider doing .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Who Should Buy Long Term Health Care Insurance ?
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Long term care insurance is a morbidity product that is underwritten on the basis on medical and behavioral information . Medical information is based on your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . Behavioral information is based on motor vehicle records , vocational and recreational hazards . Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance with the clients around age 50 . But the buying public tends to purchase long term care insurance around age 60 . A couple of considerations here : You want to buy long term care when your healthy an relatively young to afford the premiums . But even if youre healthy , whats the predisposition of your family regarding assisted living and nursing home confinement ? If theres negative health history , then buying long term care earlier may be more prudent .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
You should buy Long Term Care Insurance if you want the peace of mind that knowing that your family will not have to worry about you if you need assistance in taking care of yourself in your later years . You should buy Long Term Care Insurance if you want the freedom to choose your own caregivers and residence if you can no longer live on your own , rather than have Medicaid determine where you will live . You should buy Long Term Care Insurance if you want your hard earned savings to go to your inheritance rather than to the nursing home . Should everyone buy Long Term Care Insurance ? No . But there are some very good reasons for many people to buy Long Term Care Insurance .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
People who have very few assets and/or income should probably not get long term care insurance . If there are immediate needs that will go unmet because you are concerned about a possible long term care stay in the future , then the cost of long term care insurance may not be worth it . Also , if you may perhaps go on Medicaid in the future , even without needing long term care services , you should not purchase long term care insurance , in most situations .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Basement Flooding ?
Renters insurance will not cover flood damage . Some renters policies may offer sump pump and sewer back up coverage at an additional cost . Flood insurance is sold separately and requires an agent be licensed to sell it . If you feel you need flood insurance coverage I would suggest contacting your local agent and discussing it with them .
Homeowners policies contain a specific exclusion for the peril `` Flood '' . Flood is defined as , `` A flood is a general and temporary condition where two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties are inundated by water or mudflow . '' Maybe people confuse `` flood '' as a peril as compared to `` flooding '' of a basement or floor . If , for example , a pipe were to burst and `` flood '' the basement that would be a covered loss under a Standard HO-3 Homeowners Insurance Policy . It would cover the damage to the dwelling and your contents but not the cost to replace the pipe itself . Hope this helps
The answer is no in the sense I believe your asking about . If ground water comes into your house including your basement that is a flood scenario and not covered by a conventional homeowners policy . There may be a way to protect your self if you are in an area designated as a flood zone . In that case your agent may be able to help with a WYO flood policy . Participant companies write the flood insurance and present to the consumer , but in fact the coverage is resinsured at 100 % by The National Flood Insurance Program of the US Federal Government . The reason private insurers do not provide coverage is that , it is a classic case of adverse selection . The only ones who would buy coverage are folks that live in an area that floods .
A homeowners policy pays for damages caused by specified perils . Water could enter your basement from a burst water line in the house , in which case the damage is most likely covered by your homeowners policy -LRB- there are various forms . -RRB- If the water entered your basement from outside it is very unlikely that there will be any coverage because that peril is usually excluded from a homeowners policy . 25 % of losses suffered by homeowners have to do with flood . Flood insurance is usually a separate policy .
This depends on the cause . If water is seeping though the walls , it typically is not covered as that would be considered maintenance . If the water is due to flood , it would only be covered under a flood policy . If the damage was due to a busted pipe or water heater , it would normally be covered . Repairs for common damp basements are not covered by homeowners insurance .
The best answer that I could provide to this question is ; you should at minimum have your home insured for the amount that it would cost to rebuild it should you have a complete loss . Other things to consider with this coverage are additional endorsements to cover personal items that are not properly covered under the homeowner policy . Are you at risk for flooding , you might want to consider a flood insurance policy . Do you have a finished basement ? You may want sump and sewer coverage . The list goes on and on . I would also suggest a personal umbrella to every homeowner . All policies are not created equal . Please call your local agent to discuss your specific needs and wants so that he/she taylor a policy that best fits you .
Yes and no ! The typical multi-peril homeowners policy water covers damage caused by rain under specific circumstances such as water windblown thru the roof shingles or a hole in the wall or roof caused by lightning . However if it rains to the degree that water collects on the ground and enter your home thru doors or windows , the homeowners policy does not cover it . That would require a flood insurance policy . If it rains and your sump pump fails and water fills your basement , most homeowners policies will NOT cover the loss , though many companies offers optional sump pump failure coverage . Consult your insurance professional for the details that apply in your state .
The short answer is it depends . A typical Howeowners policy will not cover basement walls/foundation for normal wear and tear . However , if a named peril occurs for which you have coverage , then you can make a claim against your insurance company . For example , if you have an earthquake endorsement on your policy and one occurs , that will trigger coverage for your basement walls . Acorollaryto this is seeking a basement wall/foundation endorsement on your policy . This will provide more elaborate coverage for your basement walls/foundation regardless of a named peril .
It will , but it also depends upon where the water came from . If there is a heavy wind and rain storm and the wind damages your roof , causing rain water to leak in and damage the inside of your home , there will be coverage for that . If on the other hand , the heavy rain does not causedirect damage to your home , but raises the water table in your property , which causeswater to leak into your basement , it is possible that there would not be any coverage for that because ground waterdamage is usually excluded under a homeowners policy . Be sure to ask your insurance professional about coverge for failure of any sewars or drainage systems like curtain drains or sump pumps . If you have such coverage , then you will be more likely to be covered if your basement fills with water as a result of any failure .
Talk to your Insurance Professional about coverage options that are available to you . Provide the address of your home along with key information such as the year of construction , style of construction and proximity to both a hydrant and fire station . Talk about any specialty items in your home such as finished basement , fireplace , upgraded kitchen and bathroom features , flooring types etc. . It would be helpful to know if your roof had been replaced or if systems such as heating , electrical or plumbing have been upgraded . If you have a garage , is it separate or attached to your home . If attached , is it along side , built in or basement ? Be sure to advise if you have a central station fire or burglary alarm system . Finally , unless they already have it , they will need your personal information including full name , date of birth and in some cases social security number .
Once rain water hits the ground it is considered to be the peril `` flood '' . If the water finds its way into the basement that is considered `` seepage '' and is excluded under most homeowners insurance policies . Some companies will consider coverage under the `` water back-up of sewers and drains '' coverage however that is pushing the limits . It will come down to the company and adjuster to decide coverage .
Great question . And the answer depends on what you mean by floor damage . Because there are situations that would be covered and situations that would not . For example if there is water overflow of an appliance that soaks a wood floor and destroys it you are likely covered . If the concrete floor in the basement cracks from settling over time , you will not be covered . If a wood floor has to be replaced due to poor workmanship , you are not covered . When in doubt , it is best to report a claim and have a claims specialist determine how the policy language relates to your specific situation . And of course consult your insurance professional to advocate on our behalf .
It can , yes . Some companies offer coverage for `` failure of sewer or drain '' . In the event your company does , then should your sump pump fail to do it 's job and any acccumulating water in your basement damages either your presonal property or structure , then yes , you would have coverage .
It depends upon the source of the water damage , the type of policy you have and whether the house is abandoned . To make this answer easier , lets assume that you have a Homeowners 3 policy and the house is either occupied or vacant -LRB- some furniture and presence -RRB- . Water damage from a burst pipe : typically your homeowners insurance will water damage from a burst pipe , however it will not cover the damaged pipe . You can get an endorsement to cover the damaged pipes . Water damage from rain/hail/wind : this will only be covered on a basic homeowners policy if the rain/hail caused the hole in the roof that lead to the water damage in your bathroom . Once again , you can get an endorsement to cover rain/hail/wind damage . Water damage from sewer backup or sump-pump failure : if the bathroom is in the basement and the water damage if from sewer backup or sump-pump failure you can only get coverage for this IF you have the appropriate endorsement - sewer and water backup . Please note that this is typically a sub-limit in your policy and goes towards both cleanup and replacement . I hope this helps .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
To have flood covered by any type of renters or homeowners coverage , you must have a special flood policy . Your homeowners and renters will cover water damage due to sewer backup , burst pipes , or rain damage from a leaking roof , it will not cover flood . There is a special Federal Flood Insurance program you can look in to if you live in a flood zone .
Yes , if the damage is due to a covered loss . Typically this will only come into play when rebuilding the home as the foundation may need to be replaced along with the home -LRB- normally when your reconstruction cost is calculated it also includes whether or not you have a basement -RRB- or if your home has an exposed foundation . I encourage you to read your policy completely to understand what is covered and what the exclusions are or contact your local agent to have them go over your policy coverage and exclusions .
State Farm renter 's insurance does not cover flood . In fact , no renter 's insurance policy covers flood since it must be purchased separately . It is a specific risk that has been handled by a government agency in the past . If you are in a flood zone or are at risk for flood damage , you can speak to a broker about rates and policy information .
Standard renters ' insurance does not cover damage to property from flooding . A separate flood policy is available through most insurance agencies , as part of the Federal flood program . Usually , the coverage that is most important to the renter is for contents that could possibly be damaged as a result of flooding .
There are hundreds of species of mold common to the United States . Small areas of visible mold that build up on moist areas in a home not only look bad but are also a health risk , the mold may cause allergy like symptoms and/or breathing difficulties . Basic home insurance policies , generally limit coverage for mold or exclude it . It is very easy for mold to grow given suitable conditions in a home that does n't show pride of ownership ; mold claims became so excessive in prior years , the insurance industry chose to limit or exclude coverage rather than raise premium to address the growing claims . Although the standard coverage will vary from State to State as well as vary between insurance carriers , it is important to view your specific insurance policy to find out if there is coverage for mold and what the limit is.In some cases , a carrier will actually allow an extended amount of coveragefor an additional premium . It is best to maintain a clean and moisture free structure to prevent the growth of mold . In homes with a basement , it is important to remove all moisture as quickly as possible following any leaks . The Federal EPA recommends homeowners clean up any area affected by mold which is less than 10 square feet using bleach or a suitable product , any area larger than that should involve a professional .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Cover Structural Damage ?
Structural damage may be covered under your homeowners policy . Coverage is going to depend a lot on the cause of the damage and also the coverages that offered by your your homeowners policy . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
Damage to a structure from termites , ants and insects in general is not covered under the standard homeowner insurance policy . The underlying theory is that such damage is the result of infestation due to negligence on the part of the homeowner as the proximate cause of the occurrence . The homeowner is obligated to inspect for such damage and remedy the situation accordingly . Homeowner insurance covers structural damage that is sudden and accidental in nature . Infestation does not fit these criteria . Check with a qualified -LRB- recommended -RRB- and fully licensed pest control operation in your area . You may be able to purchase a policy or bond that would cover you for certain types of infestation after they have inspected and possibly treated your residence structure . We are talking about structural damages here . There could be coverage for damages that might occur from a roof collapse , for example , resulting from the infestation , that causes loss to other property within the dwelling . However , the infestation damage itself is not covered .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Home Insurance , Hazard Insurance or Property Insurance are synonymous general terms . 1 - 4 unit homes are usually protected by a Homeowners Insurance Policy -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy -LRB- Tenant Occupied -RRB- . The Homeowners Insurance Policy covers the Dwelling , Detached Structures , Personal Property , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others most commonly written on Form HO-3 published by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . It is important to study the features and perils covered ; for example , damage caused by Earthquakes and/or Floods is not covered . The Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy covers the Dwelling , Detached Structures , Loss of Rent , and Premises Liabilitymost commonly written on Form DP-3 published by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . It is important to study the features and perils covered ; for example , damage caused by Earthquakes and/or Floods is not covered . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Homeowners insurance is designed to cover your home and possessions if they are damaged in a covered loss or stolen . It also protects you in a lawsuit . It is totally different than a home warranty . A home warranty just covers you for undisclosed problems when you purchase a home . It does not cover your belongings , structure damage caused by fire , wind or other perils , liability , or theft .
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
Sadly , renter 's insurance does not cover structural damage ! The reason is , that as a renter , you do not own the property -LRB- structure -RRB- , so insurance is covered by someone else . If you purchase a home , along with your personal property , you will then need coverage for your dwelling and unattached structures . A homeowner 's policy has many other additional features as well .
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Your home should be covered by a Homeowners Insurance Policy with the Dwelling Coverage equal or greater to the cost of complete reconstruction of the home . In the event of a covered total loss , you will expect your insurance company to pay for the rebuilding of your home . In addition to the home itself , you will need to make sure that your Other Structures -LRB- Detached Structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- and Personal Liability Limits are sufficient to cover your interest in the event of a covered risk . It is always best to speak to a licensed professional who will ask the appropriate questions to assess your risk and therefore suggest the best options to your specific case . Once you have assessed sufficient coverage for your home , you may adjust the premium by selecting either a higher or lower deductible . A higher deductible would generate a lower premium and a lower deductible would generate a higher premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
In short , the answer is yes . But it needs to be clarified whether you are asking for property damage to the pool itself or liability coverage . Both would be covered barring any specific pool exclusions , which I am not aware of any in the standard market . If someone were to get injured while swimming in the pool , yes , your homeowners policy should cover you for liability . Likewise , if you pool is damaged due to the standard homeowners causes of loss less any standard exclusions then the pool would be covered for property damage to the pool itself . Keep in mind that wear and tear would not be covered under your policy . So if your pool liner rips `` just because '' or the concrete foundation cracks , those would be considered wear and tear . Please note that many insurance carriers are very cautious when writing homeowners insurance on homes that have pools . Some do not like to write them with a pool exposure , some do not mind , so be sure to ask your agent how it might affect your current coverage and future coverage and what the premium impact might be . You also want to strongly consider higher liability limits in purchasing an umbrella or if you already have an umbrella policy then higher umbrella limits . It might cost you $ 150 for each additional $ 1 mil limit . Lastly , if you have a pool and want to make sure you are covered for the proper limits , make sure your coverage B -LRB- other structures -RRB- limit is sufficient to cover any losses to your pool and any other structures i.e. detached garages , sheds as well .
A homeowners policy does not cover pest control . It does cover damage to your residence ; however damage from insects is specifically excluded in most policies . Where a pest issue might be covered is hidden damage to the structure . You should call your agent and discuss the matter before submitting a claim unless someone has been injured .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
A homeowners policy is a package policy . It combines coverages . The primary coverages are property and liability . Depending upon the form being used the residence , contents , attached structures and non-attached structures on the property are covered against damage from specific perils . The liability coverage pays for legal defense and judgments arising from personal injury or property damage to the limits of the policy . This package provides value and covers most contingencies that come from owning a home .
A homeowners policy covers damage that is the result of one of the specified perils . Structural damage that is the result of fire , windstorm , hail , etc. is covered under most policies . Structural damage caused by flooding of earth movement is generally excluded . It would be a good idea to discuss this with your insurance agent prior to submitting a claim .
No . Home Insurance is not intended to cover a toilet leak . Typically the cost to repair such a leak is minor and Insurers expect the insured to take care of that on their own . Youcan get a warranty policy to cover major systems in the home . Home owners insurance covers areas like vandalism , fire , storm damage etc and tends to focus more on the structure of the home than the minor repairs that result from normal wear and tear . Plus most home owner polices have a deductible that must be paid before claims are paid . If the repair is less than the deductible it makes more financial sense to just fix it .
Yes , homeowners insurance covers the structure , foundation , and roof -LRB- unless excluded in your policy -RRB- for covered perils . Most standard home insurance policies will come with coverage for additional structures as well -LRB- shed , detached garage , guest house , etc. -RRB- . The policy covers the cost to rebuild from ground up , as long as the damage occurred from a covered peril .
Home insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses . Home insurance is not a maintenance policy and it does not cover long term damage or wear and tear . Home insurance provides coverage for your dwelling , other structures -LRB- fence , shed ect . -RRB- , personal property and liability coverage . There are several optional coverages available including Water/Sewer Backup , Law and Ordinance , Earthquake , ect . You also want to make sure you purchase a Replacement Cost policy which will provide full value for your home , not a depreciated amount .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Who Really Needs Long Term Care Insurance ?
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Long-term care is worth it when 1 . A person is capable of affording to pay the premium for at least a base policy . There is no sense buying a long-term care policy only to have to let it go later because one can not afford it anymore . 2 . Assets that are targeted for moving to the next generation need protection against the high cost ofprolonged end-of-life care . 3 . There is a family history of dementia or Alzheimer 's disease , or other debilitating ailment that might be genetically transmitted . 4 . One does not want to be a financial , emotional , or psychological burden to their spouse or adult children . 5 . Quality of care is an issue . 6 . Staying at home for as long as possible if one becomes chronically ill instead of having to go into a care facility is important . 7 . Adult children are willing to pay premiums for a long-term care policy for their parents . Probability statistics are not entirely reliable because we really do n't know what new medical procedures or accommodations may come along in the future that would change the current situation regarding long-term care . But , the best guess I 've seen justified is that about 1 in 6 will need about 2 years of care to perform daily activities before they die . The cost for that in todays dollars depends on where one lives and how long family members can last taking care of a seriously disabled elderly person before they need skilled help .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
In all honesty , Long Term Care Insurance is not important for everyone . If you have very few assets and low income , you may sacrifice to pay Long Term Care premiums for extended care that may or may not be needed , and that Medicaid could cover if needed . If being able to choose your own place and type of extended care is important to you , then Long Term Care Insurance is a great thing to own even with low assets , as long as you can afford to pay the premiums . Long Term Care Insurance is most important for those who have an estate to protect . If you have saved up to pass an inheritance to your loved ones , or wish to pass a business to a successor , your intentions could be jeopardized if you were to to need care for an extended period of time . Long Term Care can pay that for you and allow your estate to remain untouched .
In my opinion there are three factors that regulate the size of the long-term care insurance market : - Fear . No one wants to consider , discuss , or especially visualize themselves as unable to take care of normal daily activities of elderly life . Its almost as if some people say , `` If I do n't think about it , it wo n't happen to me '' . There is great anxiety over whom among their relatives or close friends might end up being their caregiver . Many people are scared that they wo n't be able to afford the cost of long-term care . They simply do not want to `` go there '' . It is too scary . - Denial . `` If I ever get that way , just take me out in the back yard and shoot me '' is the classic sign of superficial denial . Such a statement is not made with any degree of sincerity , but what it really says is that the person knows it could happen and that they do not want to live that way and be a burden to their spouse of extended family . But , not to worry . There must be a government program out there that will take care old people that have nowhere to go when they ca n't take care of themselves . Certainly , in a country as rich as ours , no one will allow another to die alone or in the gutter . - Lack of experience . The vast majority of people age 45-65 have not had to care for an elderly relative or close friend . They have no idea of the psychological and emotional energy expended in taking care of a person 24/7/365 . They have never gotten an invoice from a skilled nursing service or had to go shopping for a facility and compare prices for monthly care , nor have the ever even been inside a nursing home and seen the conditions that some elderly have to endure because they did n't have a choice . To turn the question around a bit : Who are the people that do buy their own long-term care insurance ? Most of those that do have gone through personal care giving . They know the challenge . They know the commitment . They know the costs . They know the sacrifices that others in the family have to go through . They know that extended , expensive , long-term care can effect two - even three - generations.About 8 % of the American population has purchased their own long-term care insurance . About 17 % or more of that same population is going to need two years or more of skilled long-term care , either at home , or in a facility or both . Medicare is currently footing about 30-40 % of that bill . As the boomer demographic moves through the age of needed care , who is going to pay for it ?
Medical care has a price . In the open market it is fixed by consumers who want a service and medical personnel who can deliver the service . The problem occurs when someone needs the treatment but can not or will not pay the price for the service . I say , Will not because every decision about spending is discretionary . Should society as a whole bear the responsibility for the medical care for every resident ? Should the nature of that care be regulated ? Should the source of funding be general ? Those are the most pressing questions when considering a universal health care system . Ultimately in a universal health care system there is a specified list of services and a funding mechanism that is not based upon need for medical services . You may need a procedure that isnt covered in the program . At the same time you might consider another procedure immoral or frivolous . Who is going to decide ? The idea of universal health care sounds very good until you understand that some medical services will probably not be covered . In the USSR dental hygiene consisted of inserting a fluorescent tube into the patients mouth and surgery was routinely conducted in a super-cold environment because anesthesia was not readily available . In that case , most Americans would consider the health care to be inadequate . However , it was available to all and at little or no direct cost to the consumer . Under most regimes universal health care becomes rationed health care . The best example is the army under war time conditions . It is called triage but it means that you treat those with the greatest likelihood of recovery before treating soldiers with graver injuries . While it might be the best utilization of manpower , the soldier with his leg blown off , might not like the wait and a narcotic shot is not going to make his family happy . The issue of who is going to pay for the universal health care system is the most sensitive . No one wants to see others in need . By the same token no one wants to pay the high bill for medical treatment . If the universal care is funded by general funds from taxes it will always be a political football . If it is paid by premiums paid by individuals there will always be a need to assist those unable to pay the premium . The problem really boils down to our expectations of treatment level , the availability and cost of that treatment and who is going to pay the price . Yes , it sounds like a great idea but it has many difficulties and when it is expected then the society will start to question the need for universal flat screen TVs , micro-wave ovens and wall-to-wall carpets . There really isnt an end unless you look at the Soviet Union and see how it ended .
The main disadvantages of Long Term Care insurance would be that you would die before you were able to use it or that you would be blessed with a long and healthy life and never need long term care before you passed away . Other than that the disadvantages are that it is becoming more expensive and that fewer insurance carriers are offering Long Term Care insurance . Of course , the reasons for this are testimony to the need for long term care insurance , people are living longer and therefore more people are having some period of need for long term care and long term care facilities are getting more expensive .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will My Homeowners Insurance Cover Asbestos Removal ?
Homeowners insurance protects the owner for damages that come from specified perils One peril is fire . If the home is damaged in a fire and asbestos removal is required to repair the home , it would be considered in the claim . There is an additional coverage available on a homeowners policy that provides additional money if repairs require adjustments to meet building codes . That coverage would be helpful under these circumstances . However , removal of asbestos for personal reasons would not be a covered peril .
Homeowners insurance and as far as I know any property policy in the United States as a specific Asbestos exclusion in the policy . Thehomeownerspolicy will exclude any clean up , removal or illness related to Asbestos until the end of time . If you have asbestos in your home I highly recommend you call in a profession asbestos removal team . Health of your family is primary .
Homeowners insurance protects the owner for damages that come from specified perils One peril is fire . If the home is damaged in a fire and asbestos removal is required to repair the home , it would be considered in the claim . There is an additional coverage available on a homeowners policy that provides additional money if repairs require adjustments to meet building codes . That coverage would be helpful under these circumstances . However , removal of asbestos for personal reasons would not be a covered peril .
A Homeowners Insurance policy provides coverage for losses caused by perils either named in the policy or , conversely , not excluded by the policy . Asbestos removal , like taking down a damaged or diseased tree is considered property maintenance and this is not a covered peril in a Homeowners ' Policy . Therefore , the cost of maintenance actions such as these and others , though prudent , are not covered .
In most instances the policy will not cover to remove asbestos just because you have asbestos present in your home . We would need more information to answer the question with certainty . If the removal of asbestos is required due to an insurable loss taking place it will most likely be covered as an ensuing loss .
Generally the answer to that would be no . Your Homeowners is not designed to cover this type of renovation . If your home is damaged by a covered peril then the removal of asbestos would be covered as part of the repairs , but otherwise you will have to pay .
A homeowners policy is designed to pay for damages to your home and personal property that arise from named perils . These perils include fire , wind , etc. . They do not include issues that have to do with maintenance of the structure . It is highly unlikely that your homeowners policy will pay for the removal of asbestos from the building .
When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Removal of asbestos would probably not meet this definition of coverage . Check with your insurance agent .
Check your homeowners insurance policy to see what is in the coverage exclusion clause . The wording in a policy exclusion clause may not specifically say `` asbestos '' . Often , broader terminology is used such as `` contaminant '' or `` pollutant '' . In some cases , these terms may be better defined elsewhere in the contract . There is a customer service phone number listed on your policy that should get you a quick answer .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
This is really more of a legal question than an insurance question but I 'll give you some guidelines . As a general rule , if it 's on your property , it 's your responsibility . So , legally , if it 's your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , he should take care of it . This does n't always happen , and many small battles have ensued over just this type of thing . I 've seen neighbors do some pretty weird things in these situations . I 've seen people send registered letters , call the police , report to the city or township , even hire a lawyer to sue . My advice , be reasonable and talk to your neighbor , preferably before it falls , and come to some aggreement about what needs to be done , if anything . From an insurance standpoint , nothing 's really going to be done with a fallen tree unless it falls on something an causes damage . Then , in most cases , your insurance company will pay to move it off of your home , that 's it . Some homeowners policies will have endorsements available for debris removal which may pay to remove it , usually up to some limit . Many times , though , removing it from a structure is all an insurance company will do and removing the tree from your property is your responsibility .
If the demise of the tree was naturally occuring then homeowners insurance will not cover the removal . That would be considered a maintenance issue and homeowners insurance does n't cover maintenance . However if the tree came down on and damaged the home , some coverage would be provided under the debris removal clause of the policy . Lightning damage to trees is also covered by most comprehensive policies , though a low $ $ limit of coverage is provided . Check with your local insurance professional .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
Your homeowners insurance may cover the removal of mold . It depends why there is mold in the first place as to whether they 'll cover it . If they do cover the removal of the mold , they will , most likely , have a limit on the damage . For coverage to be triggered for almost anything there must be a sudden and accidental occurrence that can be pinpointed : Roof damage from wind that let water into the house a burst water pipe or broken water heater There must be a covered cause for why the water entered the home . Only then will your company cover any resulting mold damage . Notice that I said `` resulting '' . Mold damage that appears because of seepage or some other maintenance issue will not be covered . Most companies now limit the amount of money they will spend to clean up mold damage . This will be explicitly stated in your policy and you should be aware of what that limit is . So , once again , there must be a covered cause for the resulting mold damage and there will usually be a limit for how much damage they 'll cover . be smart , read your policy and , above all , find an agent you can trust .
Unless there are extenuating circumstances behind the removal of the oil tank , I do n't believe that the removal would be covered under any homeowners policy . This would typically be designated as a maintainance issue not a claim issue . If the home is being converted to gas or electric heat from oil it would be the homeowners responsibility to dispose of the oil tank properly .
If the mole is non-cancerous , most health insurance policies will not cover removal . Health insurance plans cover most `` medically necessary '' conditions and SOME cosmetic procedures . Removal of a mole strictly for cosmetic reasons will most likely result in a claim that is denied . Examples of cosmetic procedures that may be covered include reconstructive surgery to repair damage caused by injury . Breast reconstructive surgery following removal of a cancerous growth is another example .
It 's the homeowner 's responsibility to remove dead or damaged trees before they fall . Homeowners insurance will not cover dead or damaged trees . Homeowners insurance will cover resulting damage and the cost to cut up the tree if the trees falls on covered property . If a tree falls over but does not hit covered property , there is no coverage . If your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , your neighbor is only responsible for the portion of the tree located on his property . The portion of the tree on your property is your responsibility even though it 's not your tree .
More often than not , surgical removal of a lipoma is not covered by health insurance . A lipoma is a benign soft tissue tumor that reside below the skin . They are usually soft to the touch and not painful . More often than not removal is done for cosmetic reasons . Health insurance policies cover treatment that is medically necessary . If the tumor is large and creating other medical issues -LRB- such as pressure on a nerve -RRB- or if tests reveal the tumor is liposarcoma your health insurance may cover removal .
Owning a home can be a big investment , in terms of money , time , and memories . You should make sure that you have enough homeowners insurance to protect that investment . I always tell my clients that homeowners insurance is n't meant to pay off your mortgage if something happens to it , it should be there to rebuild your dream if something happens . I use what is known as the Reconstruction Cost to calculate how much homeowners insurance you need . That coverage amount consists not only of how much it would cost to rebuild your home , but also includes some commonly overlooked things , like cost to demolish and remove debris , and possible changes in building codes and laws that could increase the cost to rebuild . Most of the other coverage , like other structures , personal property , and loss of use coverage are a percentage of the reconstruction cost .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will Homeowners Insurance Cover Cracked Foundation ?
Although the foundation is not a part of the computation upon which the replacement value of the home is established , it might be covered if there is direct physical loss by one of the named perils -LRB- in the all-risk policy it would be any peril other than those excluded . -RRB- It is very difficult to think of a circumstance where coverage would apply . The mere presence of a cracked foundation is insufficient .
A homeowners policy covers damage caused by a named peril . If the cracks in the foundation are the result of a specified peril , fire , wind , hail etc. the loss would be covered . There are perils that are not included such as earth movement . Earth movement would be the most likely cause of a crack in the foundation . Please consult with your agent prior to filing a claim .
Only if it is something that is sudden and accidental which is the key to all insurance claims . Depending on how it occurred and what made it happen is the criteria used for settling claims . As the others have mentioned , a crack in a wall / foundation etc are maintenance issues meaning over the course of owning a home you should keep the property well kept when something happens . Examples are a roof that is wearing out and needs replaced , the foundation with cracking or bowing , etc. .
In short , the answer is yes . But it needs to be clarified whether you are asking for property damage to the pool itself or liability coverage . Both would be covered barring any specific pool exclusions , which I am not aware of any in the standard market . If someone were to get injured while swimming in the pool , yes , your homeowners policy should cover you for liability . Likewise , if you pool is damaged due to the standard homeowners causes of loss less any standard exclusions then the pool would be covered for property damage to the pool itself . Keep in mind that wear and tear would not be covered under your policy . So if your pool liner rips `` just because '' or the concrete foundation cracks , those would be considered wear and tear . Please note that many insurance carriers are very cautious when writing homeowners insurance on homes that have pools . Some do not like to write them with a pool exposure , some do not mind , so be sure to ask your agent how it might affect your current coverage and future coverage and what the premium impact might be . You also want to strongly consider higher liability limits in purchasing an umbrella or if you already have an umbrella policy then higher umbrella limits . It might cost you $ 150 for each additional $ 1 mil limit . Lastly , if you have a pool and want to make sure you are covered for the proper limits , make sure your coverage B -LRB- other structures -RRB- limit is sufficient to cover any losses to your pool and any other structures i.e. detached garages , sheds as well .
Although the foundation is not a part of the computation upon which the replacement value of the home is established , it might be covered if there is direct physical loss by one of the named perils -LRB- in the all-risk policy it would be any peril other than those excluded . -RRB- It is very difficult to think of a circumstance where coverage would apply . The mere presence of a cracked foundation is insufficient .
Great Question that is most asked by homeowners in California or other state that have Earth movement . Usally this question if not easy to answer with a yes . But it would be something to ask your current insurance company but most policies do not cover foundation cracks . Always check your own policy .
Homeowners Insurance generally excludes settling of a home . Your standard HO 3 policy will read an Exclusion for : Settling , shrinking , bulging or expansion , including resultant cracking , of bulkheads , pavements , patios , footings , foundations , walls , floors , roofs or ceilings . However in any potential claim situation I recommend you consult your insurance provider .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Home owners insurance will typicallynot cover foundation cracks that are not caused by a covered peril . This is typically considered to be part of basic home maintenance . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and exclusions within the coverage or call your local agent to have them explain your policy 's coverage and exclusions .
Possibly yes and possibly no ! The question that needs to be answered is how the water got there . If the water is ground water entering the home thru doors and windows , only flood insurance , NOThomeowners insurance , covers the resultant damage . And even with flood insurance the coverage is very limitedin areas of the home below grade . If the source of the water is seepage thru cracks in the foundation there is no coverage . If the source of the water is sump pump failure , whether by power outage , mechanical failure or simply being overwhelmed , you will need to have optional coverage available from many insurers . The same for the source of the water being a back up of the sewer system . If the source of the water is overflow from above , such a burst washer hose or clogged commode , there would likely be coverage . You will want to consult your insurance professional for a detailed review of the coverage you have and/or need .
Most homeowners policies wo n't cover problems with your foundation unless something sudden and accidental has happened to it . It 's designed to cover damage , not deterioration . It 's pretty rare for something to happen that damages a foundation . Most property claims are caused by storms or fire , and neither of these will usually damage foundation . If the foundation is sagging , leaking , crumbling , or deteriorating in some way , it 's the homeowner 's responsibility to maintain it . If you live in a newer home that has serious foundation problems , you may have recourse against the builder . Foundation problems can cause significant damage to your home and personal property . Your insurance company is n't going to repair or replace property damaged by a leaky or crumbling foundation .
Homeowners Insurance does cover Swimming Pools as ` Other Structures ' which is usually 10 % of the Dwelling Coverage amount on the policy . A swimming pool is covered for the same perils that cover the home . The most common covered claim for a swimming pool would be a liability claim or medical payments claim for a slip and fall injury ; some insurance carriers will not insure a home with a pool if there is a diving board or slide in order to avoid this risk . One of the more common questions regarding a swimming pool is coverage for cracks in the pool . Cracks are usually caused by land movement or earthquakes ; this is not covered on a homeowners policy . Earthquake coverage would need to be purchased to cover this sort of damage to a swimming pool ; however , the deductible and special limits will apply to swimming pools . Please review your coverage details prior to purchasing coverage .
` Maybe ' is the most accurate answer . It is not meant to avoid answering the question but it must be remembered that the standard homeowner policy does not automatically cover damages to the structure . It is not a maintenance policy . To determine if the policy will cover such damages , the actual cause of the crack or cracks needs to be determined first .
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
A homeowners policy pays for damages cause by named perils . The perils most likely to affect a foundation would be earth movement or flood . The most common homeowners policy excludes coverage for those perils . You can get policies to cover each of those circumstances . If , however , the foundation was damaged as the result of a named peril , such as fire , the damages would be covered under the Homeowners policy .
If the crack in the chimney liner was caused by a covered loss and the crack is a detriment to the safety of the residents or adversely affects the property it may be covered . Every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand what coverage is provided and what exclusions there may be .
You can purchase an endorsement called Water/Sewer Backup which will cover resulting damage from a water/sewer line backup . The sewer line itself is not covered but the resulting damage is covered . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses . It is not a maintenance policy and it does not cover damage from wear and tear so if you sewer line needs to be replaced because it is old or tree roots have cracked the pipe , there is no coverage .
If the cause of a slab leak is a named peril the leak will be covered . In an all-risk policy that includes every conceivable cause of loss except those specifically excluded . Some of those exclusions could cause a slab to leak . There isnt coverage if the slab leaks because of underground water , or earth movement . If the crack was the result of settling , cracking , or shrinking the claim would not be covered .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
A cracked windshield is covered under the comprehensive portion of your policy . This section is subject to a deductible so the company will replace the windshield and you must pay the deductible . Driving with a cracked windshield is dangerous so get this replaced soon . If the damage is slight many companies will provide repair coverage under the comprehensive portion and will waive the deductible .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Term Life Insurance Pay Dividends ?
Dividends are paid by policies which accumulate equity , such as Whole Life . Term life does not accumulate equity , but merely provide death protection -LRB- unless of course you buy Term living benefits coverage -RRB- , so it does NOT pay dividends . I would urge you to talk with your agent . There are many choices out there now which can pay you , and have a variety of premiums which are much more affordable than you might think . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Does term life pay dividends ? Currently ? No . At one time a very long time ago , some term policies did pay a dividend to policyholders , but we are talking a very long time ago . Current term policies do not pay dividends to policyholders . Term insurance , much like rent , is a temporary arrangement between a individual and a insurance company .
No , Term Life Insurance does not pay dividends . It also does not have cash value , and if you quit paying on a Term Life policy , the policy will end without any surrender value . Universal Life Insurance and non-participating Whole Life also do not pay dividends . Only `` participating Whole Life '' pays dividends .
No , Term Life Insurance does not pay dividends . It also does not have cash value , and if you quit paying on a Term Life policy , the policy will end without any surrender value . Universal Life Insurance and non-participating Whole Life also do not pay dividends . Only `` participating Whole Life '' pays dividends .
There are three different types of companies that sell life insurance . Stock companies , which pay profits to stockholder aft expenses , fraternal 's that have a common membership and profits are used to provide extra benefits for the members , and mutual companies that pay excess profits back to the policy holder in the form of dividends . Dividends then are the excess profit a mutual company pays . You will have three options with a company that pays dividends : You can leave them to accumulate interest , but you may have to pay tax on the interest , you can allow them to buy additional paid up insurance , this is the one I usually recommend . This helps increase your death benefit thus allowing for inflation . The third option is using them to reduce premium , thus in some case depending on the dividends paid the dividends will eventually be making your premium payments for you . Dividends are not guaranteed .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
Any life insurance policy that is participating can pay dividends . The most ubiquitous type of life insurance to pay dividends is whole life insurance , but it is not the only type f life insurance that can be participating -LRB- pays dividends -RRB- . It 's important to note that just because a policy is participating , there is no guarantee that it will pay dividends in any given year . Dividends are paid as a result of surplus -LRB- excess earnings -RRB- with the insurer on the product issued .
Does term life pay dividends ? Currently ? No . At one time a very long time ago , some term policies did pay a dividend to policyholders , but we are talking a very long time ago . Current term policies do not pay dividends to policyholders . Term insurance , much like rent , is a temporary arrangement between a individual and a insurance company .
Life insurance dividend options tell the insurance company what you want to do with the dividend that is paid on a participating policy . Options depend on the company , but the most common options are : - Paid-up additions - where divididends are used to purchase paid up additions - Accumulate at interest - dividends are placed into an account at the insurance company and they earn a specificed interest rate set by the company - Reduce premium - dividends are used to pay down the premium or cover the entire premium due if the dividend is large enough to cover the premium - Purchase one year term insurance - the dividend purchases term insurance to increase total death benefit - Cash - the policy holder is simply paid the dividend as a check
By IRS definition Life Insurance Dividends are considered a return of `` unused premium '' and not subject to income tax as they have already been taxed going in as premium . Mutual companies pay dividends to policyholders as they have no stockholders as owners of the company . The permanent policyholders -LRB- not term , not universal life policyholders -RRB- are considered the owners of the company and dividends are applied to their whole life policies . A dividend for a mutual life insurance company is a combination of investment return , positive mortality experience -LRB- fewer deaths than expected -RRB- and operating expense savings and what is held as surplus by the company . Money beyond what the company needs or projects is returned to whole life policyholders in that form of a dividend . The surplus is what protects the company if for some reason they goof . Most mutual companies have been paying dividends consistently for more than a century .
Paying life insurance dividends can be paid on any type of policy from any participating life insurance carrier . The most common companies that pay dividends are called mutual insurance companies . Some of the more common names of mutual insurance companies are State Farm , NY Life and Northwestern Mutual . Mutual insurance companies consider the policyholders part owners of the company and share a portion of the profits as dividends . You may or may not receive a benefit based on the year 's profits . You may find mutual company premiums a bit more expensive than none mutual companies with an expectation of paying their dividends . When purchasing a life insurance policy you should find the best product at the best price to cover your unique situation , not on who pays a dividend or not .
A participating whole life insurance policy has the potential to generate an annual dividend . It can also have the potential to generate a terminal dividend at the surrender of the policy . Dividends are not guaranteed . A dividend is the return of unused premium to the policy owner . Because dividends are considered return of unused premiums , they are not taxed up to basis . Dividends can be taken in cash and used in a verity of internal policy rider applications : term insurance paid up additional insurance , to reduce premiums , to pay premiums , etc. .
The type of life insurance that pays a dividend is called a participating policy . Dividends are paid when the insurance company makes a profit and , in essence , shares them with its policyholders . The type of life insurance company that offers participating policies that pay dividends is called a mutual company . The type of policy that pays a dividend is usually Whole Life .
If a life insurance policy is truly `` paid up '' it simply means no further premiums are due and it is guaranteed to be that way . Some people use the term `` paid up '' incorrectly to describe premium `` offsets '' using dividend values to pay required premiums . Such arrangements are not paid up and not guaranteed . More on this in the last paragraph . Some whole life policies are designed to be paid up at a relatively early duration e.g. Policy Year 20 , Age 65 , etc. . The premiums for these policies are relatively high as a result . In comparison , in most cases , whole life policies are designed to have required premiums to age 95 or 100 or later . Such policies have relatively low premiums and are not paid up until age 95 or 100 . A policy can also be `` paid up '' at a lesser value than the death benefit . Whole life policies feature a `` reduced paid up '' non forfeiture provision . In the event the policy owner wishes to stop paying annual required premiums , the policy owner can ask the insurer to reduce the death benefit amount for the policy so that no further premiums would need to be paid . It is important to note that policies which use policy dividends and/or the cash value of Paid Up Additions to offset the required premiums due at some future point are not `` paid up '' . In a low interest environment like we have now , dividends are being reduced from what was illustrated . Many clients who expected to stop paying premiums and instead pay them via the dividend values in their policy can not do so yet since the dividend values are not sufficient to offset premiums .
Life insurance dividends are paid on par life insurance plans . Most par plans are some form of permanent life insurance but term policies can pay dividends as well . Dividends result from the insurance carrier `` overcharging '' you so any dividend is considered a return of premium and is normally not subject to taxation .
You may not `` need '' life insurance , but you might want to buy it . I often recommend that a young single person purchase a quality permanent plan of insurance for final expenses and then purchase additional amounts of term life insurance as life events occur -LRB- marriage , children , mortgage , etc. -RRB- . In later life , the term ends asinsurance needs reduce , and the insured person then has very inexpensive life insurance for wrapping things up after a long and productive life . If it can be afforded , a goalfor paying off the premium on the permanent plan early can be made so that covering some or all of the final expenses will be with `` free '' life insurance . If the permanent plan is participating whole life -LRB- life insurance that pays a dividend -RRB- , later in life the dividend may be large enough to either greatly reduce or eliminate premium altogether with the possibility of having an increasing death benefit as surplus dividends purchase additional coverage going forward . The variable in this strategy is insurability . None of us knows if we will become uninsurable in the future due to accident or illness . Buying permanent insurance as young as possible and getting the lowest premium possible is an important factor in planning . The second best choice is a fully convertible term plan of insurance that allows the insured to convert or exchange all or part of the terms death benefit to a permanent plan of insurance with the same carrier . There is no need to medically qualify in exercising this contractual guarantee . -LRB- NOTE : Be careful to assure yourself that the conversion is contractually guaranteed for the full period that the policy is in force . Some carriers have weakened this feature with limitations and exceptions . -RRB-
Mutual funds distributions are different from the dividends paid by stocks . Stock dividends are usually a distribution of profits . Most mutual funds are set up as trusts and pay tax at the highest rate on any gains -LRB- interest , dividends , capital gains -RRB- that are held in the mutual fund . In order to avoid paying tax at the highest rate the mutual find flows through the gains to unit holders . Some mutual funds also distribute a portion of the original capital . Consequently , the distribution paid by a mutual fund does not simple reflect the dividends paid by the stocks held by the mutual fund . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
It depends does not really sound like much of an answer . It really does depend on the type of plan you have chosen . Some plans are guaranteed paid up after a number of years for example 20 years , at age 65 or 100 It would be stated in the policy contract . If the policy is participating -LRB- with dividends -RRB- then you maybe able to use dividends to reduce or pay premiums . -LRB- Dividends are not guaranteed -RRB- If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The face amount of the policy represents the face amount the policy is scheduled to pay out . In the case of a graded death benefit the policy will pay a reduced amount for the first 2 or three policy years before going to the actual face amount . Some companies pay dividends . These dividends can be used to buy additional insurance thus increasing the death benefit . But dividends are not guaranteed Should you die the beneficiary would receive the Face amount of the policy plus any paid up insurance accumulated by the dividends . In the case of a Universal Life policy , the policy would pay the face amount plus if you choose you can have the death benefit increased by any cash value accumulated in the policy . Because of the nature of Universal Life you need to make sure you are paying sufficient premium to keep the policy in force , otherwise the policy would lose the death benefit entirely . Always read your annual statement if you have a Universal Life policy .
Dividends are paid by policies which accumulate equity , such as Whole Life . Term life does not accumulate equity , but merely provide death protection -LRB- unless of course you buy Term living benefits coverage -RRB- , so it does NOT pay dividends . I would urge you to talk with your agent . There are many choices out there now which can pay you , and have a variety of premiums which are much more affordable than you might think . Thank you . GARY LANE .
end question
start question
life-insurance
When Is A Good Time To Get Life Insurance ?
There is never a better time to get Life insurance then now . Life insurance increases every year you get older and your health is not guarantteed . Life insurance is also the only insurance product on the market that is guarantteed you 'll use . Term rates are at an all time low and obtaining a policy has never been easier . Just make sure you deal with a company who has a good tract record and who will be here in the next 40 - 50 years .
The best time to buy life insurance is the day before you die . That way you wo n't pay a penny more than you have to for your coverage ! What 's that you say ? You do n't know the day you are going to die ? Hmmm ... well then , the answer is easy : The best time to buy life insurance is now . Assuming you have a need -LRB- or a desire -RRB- for life insurance coverage , you are best served buying it sooner rather than later . Term life insurance rates are as inexpensive as they will ever be , and they will only get more expensive as you grow older . If you are interested in cash value insurance , it 's even more important that you buy it sooner rather than later . Find yourself a qualified agent and work with him or her to design a program of life insurance coverage that will address your needs and keep your overall costs down .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
If the only conversion option your policy offers is Whole Life , the rate is probably going to be quite a bit higher than if you take out a new , no lapse , Universal Life policy . However , when you convert Term Life , you are rated the same on your Whole Life that you were rated on your Term policy . So if your health has declined , you may be getting a good deal by converting . If it has not declined , I personally would check out a new policy to see how much you can save . As to when to convert , it depends on several factors . 1 . HOW MUCH you want to convert . If you want to convert it all , it may be a good idea to do it now , while rates are lower . They will go up quite a bit over the next 10 years . 2 . YOUR HEALTH . If you have very poor health , you may just want to pay those low Term rates another 10 years . If you have excellent health , it might be a good time to convert or look at what else you can get in a permanent policy . 3 . WILL YOU NEED LIFE INSURANCE after age 60 ? By the time you are 60 you should have a good idea of whether you will need that much coverage . You have some time to get a feel for how your retirement is going to pan out before you make this big decision . You can not reverse it and go back to Term , once you have converted your policy . Please feel free to contact me to help you ascertain what prices are out there for you , or help you figure out what direction to go . Best wishes .
If you have good health , that is always the best time to buy life insurance . It is cheaper when you have good health . If you have poor health , that is a good reason to buy life insurance . People with poor health need that protection . So good health or poor health , now is a good time to buy life insurance .
A good life insurance agent has some important characteristics . A good agent is a good listener . A good agent will listen to you and will check with you to make sure that you are fully understood . A good agent communicates clearly to both you and to the insurance company . The agent should explain as completely as possible the details of the policy and patiently answer your questions . The good agent will communicate your information and concerns to the underwriting staff of the insurance company . Underwriters are usually quite conservative . The more that the agent can paint a picture that the underwriter can understand ; it is more likely that you will have a good outcome . Finally a good agent offers sound financial advice . A good agent isnt an order taker . A good agent will show you the advantages of alternate approaches to your problem . A good agent will not leave out anything vital to the case and will carefully counsel you as it regards your unique situation . Are there many good life insurance agents ? I think that there are , however , they are often in demand and do little to solicit business . You probably need to check with your colleagues and friends and locate that good life insurance agent that they trust .
You should get life insurance whenever the need arises for that type of protection . If you are young and have school loans to pay off , that is a good time to get life insurance . If you are elderly and do not have funds set aside for your funeral , that is a good time to get life insurance . And there are a myriad of other reasons to get life insurance at any age in between .
All policies end when death occurs . If the policy is in force at the time of death , the policy will pay the face amount at that time . When you purchase Term Life Insurance , you decide at that time when you want your coverage to end . It corresponds with the number of years in your Term policy . As a rule , the older you are when the policy ends , the higher the premium will be . But you also have to consider that , if you want to purchase a new policy after this one ends , the price on the new policy will be much higher , or you may not be able to qualify for the amount of coverage that you want at that time . So locking in the premium for a long period of time while you are healthy is a good idea , if you need the coverage for a long period of time . Permanent life insurance ends when the policy matures , at which time you can take the face amount in cash . But most people choose to keep the policy in effect beyond that , until death .
The time to purchase life insurance is when there is a need for it , and when you can qualify for it . For most people , this begins when they are young adults , getting married , starting families , paying off school loans , buying houses , starting businesses . Of course , any time there is a need for life insurance is a good time to get it .
Many people decide to get life insurance when they have a change in their lives that adds financial responsibilities . E.g. Getting married , having a baby , buying a house or business . Others are jolted to get life insurance when they , or people they know , have a health scare . It is better to get life insurance before being diagnosed with a serious health condition , but any time you need life insurance is a good idea to get it .
I believe a well-balanced , personalized portfolio is the best for young people . Young people should think about purchasing term insurance due to the fact you can get a lot more for lower premiums . They should also consider whole-life life insurance . Young people should also consider such products as : annuities , long-term care insurance and disability insurance etc. . Term insurance is a good product to cover expenses in case something happens to the young person before the whole-life life insurance has a chance to mature . How many times have young people been killed in car accidents or diagnosed with some form of a terminal illness ? Then the family has to put little jugs and jars around in businesses asking for donations to cover the final expenses and other debts . That is not a time for embarrassing situations like that . That is a time for mourning and for family gathering together . Whole-life life insurance is a great product due to the fact the premiums do not change over the life of the insured . These products , if set up correctly and under current tax laws , allow the insured to pass on a legacy to his heirs tax-free . Annuities are great products for young people to start so they can plan for retirement . When you are ready to retire it is to late to start planning . Long-term care insurance is great in case you need some form of assisted living at any stage of your life . Disability insurance is great in case you get hurt and can not work but you need money for shelter , food and other bills . I am not suggesting you purchase all of these products at one time . I do recommend you meet with a licensed insurance professional and get a good foundation built . Then add to your portfolio over time . Keep in mind these products are generally less expensive when you are young . It is kind of like building a house . You do not want to start with the roof and work down . You should really start with purchasing the land , looking at blueprints , checking out contractors and pulling permits etc. . Then you form the foundation and build upwards towards the roof . To your prosperity .
A good age to get life insurance is when you are younger , as the premiums will be lower then . You will really notice the difference in rates for longer term or permanent policies . $ 250,000 of 30 year level Term will cost under $ 300 per year for a 25 year old male in Preferred health . At age 55 , that same policy would cost nearly $ 2,000 per year for a man in Preferred health . However , at age 55 there is a greater chance of having developed some type of health condition , which can increase premiums or even prevent you from getting that much life insurance . Therefore , it is best to get life insurance in your younger years , but any time you need it is a good time to get it .
Nope . Life insurance can not be an investment . Think about this question for a second . What is the most essential element in an investment ? It is time . Some investments need time to mature . Other investments need time to increase in value . Example : if you are invested in the stock market , and your investment decreases in value , what should you do ? Should you sell ? Of course not . You would sustain the loss only if you redeem the shares at a lower price than when you bought them . What you should do is let them ride , and if properly managed , they should recoup their value , and then some . Over time . If you die , then you could pass this investment on to a family member , and that person could continue to manage the fund . It could continue to grow in value . Over time , during his or her lifetime . Does life insurance buy you this kind of time ? Absolutely not . The product is designed in just the opposite way . It assumes you will run out of time tomorrow . You get the biggest bang for the buck when a death benefit is paid immediately . Somebody could conceivably buy a policy today , pay one monthly premium , and then die . The beneficiary would receive the entire survivor benefit . Would you call something an investment if it required no time to realize value ? Nope . Or that is guaranteed to pay out , for that matter ? Lets talk about that guarantee for a second . Of all the forms of insurance you might buy , the only one you know for sure will pay a benefit is life insurance . This is because you know for sure you are going to die . You could buy medical insurance , but never get sick . You could buy disability insurance , but never get hurt . You could buy auto insurance , but never have a car accident . You could buy professional liability insurance , but never get sued . You could buy home insurance , but never have a fire . And on and on . However , if you hold on to that life insurance policy , you know your survivors will get paid . For sure . So , life insurance is a uniquely wonderful risk management tool that requires no time at all to realize value , and is absolutely guaranteed . With these characteristics , it meets nobodys definition of an investment . Now : I am sure you know that certain life insurance products can produce cash value . Whole life , universal life . Even term can carry a return of premium feature . But these funds are not to be considered investments . They should be seen as added value . As ways to partially offset your cost . As an extra benefit . They make the purchase of a policy extra attractive . But you should never assume that they will have time to grow . They will disappear as soon as a claim is filed and a benefit paid . And that could be tomorrow .
Getting life insurance is not hard when you have a good agency handling your case . If there is not good communication going on , it can be frustrating to get through the application process , especially if you have never applied for life insurance before . It helps immensely to have an agent who will explain your options , fill out the application with you , be available to answer questions , and guide you after your approval until the policy is in effect . It also helps to have an in house Case Manager who gives you regular updates and lets you know what you can to do help move things along . Also , getting No Exam life insurance can make it easy to get life insurance . If that is an option and you are willing to possibly pay a little extra for that convenience , getting life insurance that does not require a physical can be a good choice for someone who does not want to take the time or effort of going through medical underwriting .
Life Insurance for soldiers -LRB- SGLI -RRB- costs 6.5 cents per month per $ 1,000 of coverage at the current time -LRB- June , 2013 -RRB- . To calculate that , you take the number of thousands of dollars of coverage you are receiving -LRB- soldiers are automatically enrolled for $ 400,000 -RRB- times that factor . 400 times 6.5 cents comes to $ 26/month . With the TSGI protection added for $ 1/month , the total premium comes to $ 27/month . Keep in mind that , under current VA benefits there is no time when you will be able to convert that Term policy to Permanent insurance , or buy a Permanent policy , through the Veterans Administration . So while that is a very reasonable price for $ 400,000 of life insurance , it is a good idea to get a private permanent policy on the side while young and healthy enough to get a good rate .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
When your Term Life Insurance ends , the price of the Term coverage usually jumps way up in price . After this , the rate can go up every year , so most people choose to get a new policy . However , they must be medically able to get a new policy , and their rates will be based on their new age , usually causing the new policy to cost substantially more than the one whose term just ended . If health has declined since purchasing the original Term policy , it may be a good idea to convert the Term insurance to permanent . This must be done within a certain time frame . The new rates will be based on current age , and the product that you can convert to may not be the product that you would prefer . But converting does not require evidence of good health , so is a good way to get coverage when other doors are closed .
Term life insurance is good to pay large expenses that only last for a set length of time . A mortgage , small business loan , or tuition loan are some large liabilities that most people do not have the money saved up to pay off , if they should die prematurely . But they are expenses that will not last forever . Therefore , Term insurance is a low cost way to cover those large debts for a set period of time , without breaking the bank . Another thing Term insurance is good for is raising a family . I recommend purchasing Term insurance long enough to get the youngest child to at least age 23 . Not in every case , but generally , I feel that Term insurance is not good for small face amounts . Most people who rely on life insurance to cover small debts , will also need life insurance to cover their final expenses . There are so many reasonably priced Whole Life policies that can be purchased in very small face amounts , and for persons of all type of health . And you can really save a lot of money on those policies by buying them at a younger age . Some can be paid up in a set number of years , and some have such good cash value that , if you decided to stop paying on the policy in the future , you would still have a decent sized paid up policy to hold onto . Of course , Term Life is also not good for any need that does not end until death . E.g. Funeral costs , paying estate settlement costs , passing money to grandchildren , etc. . Unless you know that you will have a large stream of money in the future so that you can afford to convert your Term insurance to permanent later on , you are usually better off just buying Whole Life or guaranteed no lapse Universal Life , to start with , for needs that do not end until death . Those are my general opinions on what Term Life Insurance is good for , and what it is not so good for . There are many exceptions as each person 's situation is different and policies can be set up to accomplish different purposes . Please do not hesitate to give me a call if you 'd like to discuss this in person .
A good time to purchase life insurance is while you are young and healthy . That is when you can lock in the lowest rates . But if you are past your youth or do not have good health , it is still a good time to get life insurance . There are policies out there for everyone , and age and poor health do n't make you need it any less .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medigap Insurance Cover Drugs ?
No , Medigap plans on today 's marketplace do not cover drugs . If you have a Medigap plan or are looking to buy one , you would need to add a standalone part D prescription drug plan to cover prescription drugs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Some Medigap Plans sold in the past did cover prescription drugs ; however , Medigap Policies sold after January 1 , 2006 are not allowed to include coverage for prescription drugs . Medigap Plans fill in the `` gaps '' that original Medicare does not cover . So it will pay for approved Medicare items . With that said , Medicare only covers a limited amount of drugs . Examples include : injections recieved in the doctor 's office , certain oral anti-cancer drugs , some types of drugs used with various durable medical equipment -LRB- ex : nebulizer or external infusion pump -RRB- , and under extremely limited circumstances , certain drugs you receive in a outpatient hospital setting . Some drugs in a hospital setting are known as `` self-administered drugs '' -LRB- drugs you normally take on your own -RRB- . These are not covered by Part B and , therefore , not paid for by your Medigap Plan .
It depends a lot on which Medigap Plan you have . Medigap Plans are designed to cover most of what original Medicare Part A & Part B does not cover . However , all Medigap Plans do not have prescription drug coverage . You would need to get a Part D plan in addition to cover prescriptions . This is a good thing because you will be able to change your drug plan as your prescription needs change without needing to change your Medigap Plan . Medigap Plans also do not cover dental and vision , however , you can get a separate dental/vision plan . The quickest way to find out what Medigap Plans cover and is to go to our website . You can compare Medigap Plans instantly online at SummitMedigap.com .
Medigap and Med Advantage plans are SIGNIFICANTLY different . For a MedAdvantage Plan , they are basically like an HMO . You have a primary physician who is essentially the gate keeper . You do need referrals and you do have co-pays . A Med Advantage plan does also contain a drug plan component , which the supplements do not . If you have significant health issues , than of course the co-pays can add up , however the monthly premium is usually significantly less than the average Medigap plan . Medigap Plans again , are significantly different . The coverage provided by a Medigap Plan is dependent upon what plan you get . The plans are all identified by a corresponding letter . For example , an F Plan tends to offer the most solid coverage , but of course the price is among the highest as you 'd expect . Each lettered plan is written and designed by the government , so no F Plan is different than another , no G is different than another G , etc etc. . What is different is what each individual insurance company charges for the play . So it 's not uncommon for company A to charge 1 price for an F Plan , and companies B , C , D , & E all have significantly different prices for the exact SAME COVERAGE . One thing that I would do is make sure you understand how each lettered plan works , because the difference in coverage can be quite significant . For example , make sure you understand exactly what a `` Part B Excess Charge '' is . In some states , such as PA , they are illegal , but in my state , which is NJ they are perfectly legal . If you purchase a plan that does n't cover the Part B Excess Charge , you could find yourself pleasantly surprised by a significant bill if you ever have a major procedure done . Medigap Plans DO NOT come with a drug plan , or vision plan or dental . A Drug Plan is the only one you are REQUIRED to get , or you could face a penalty by the government . But again , the drug plan must be purchased on the side , as there is no such thing as a Medigap that comes with a drug plan .
For all intents and purposes , the answer is no . There are certain drugs , which must be prescribed , e.g. Cancer treatment drugs , that are covered under Medicare Part B. Drugs covered under Medicare Part B would also be covered under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs however are not covered by traditional Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- or Medigap supplemental insurance . An eligible Medicare beneficiary needs a Part D prescription drug plan in order to obtain drug coverage . You can enroll in a Part D plan at Medicare.gov , subject to certain enrollment period restrictions . As an alternative to a stand alone Part D plan , a beneficiary can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes Part D coverage -LRB- MAPD -RRB- . A beneficiary who enrolls in an MAPD can not have a Medigap policy or a stand alone Part D plan . It 's a good idea to find a licensed insurance agent who specializes in Medicare plans to review your needs and objectives and present you with optimal solutions .
It ultimately depends on what prescription drug plan you have . Not all drug plans are the same . The list of covered drugs -LRB- also known as a formulary for Medicare programs -RRB- will tell you whether your Cialis prescription will be covered . If it 's listed as a covered drug , then you would only pay your share of the expense -LRB- deductible , copay , and/or coinsurance , etc. -RRB- . If it 's not a covered drug , then you would be responsible for 100 % of the cost . It may simply be that the prescription drug plan you have does not cover this specific drug . \ At age 71 , I 'm assuming you 're on Medicare . If so , regardless of whether your drug coverage is under a Medicare Advantage plan or through a stand-alone Part D plan , you would not be able to make any changes to your drug coverage until the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15 - December 7 of each year -RRB- . During the annual enrollment period , you can evaluate your options to see which carrier 's plan will cover this prescription . If you 're covered under an employer plan , options may be limited , but if more than one option is available , I would recommend reviewing each of them to see which plan will be most suitable for your needs . If it 's an individual poilcy , I recommend contacting the agent who placed the covered for you -LRB- that person would be the servicing agent for the program -RRB- or call your insurance carrier directly to find out if it should be a covered drug under your plan . If you have a group policy , then you would need to either contact the carrier directly or your human resources department should be able to put you in contact with the appropriate person . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable ! The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable!The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Generally speaking , a Medigap policy will not cover prescription drugs . However , certain prescribed drugs covered under Medicare part B qualify for coverage under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs require enrollment into a part D prescription drug plan . I recommend locating a licensed agent specializing in Medicare/prescription drug plans to find the prescription plan the best suits your needs ...
Medigap policies serve as a supplement to Original Medicare . Original medicare is an 80/20 plan , where Medicare pays 80 % of the approved charges . The beneficiary is typically responsible for the 20 % co-insurance as well as co-pays and deductibles that come with Medicare Parts A & B . The Medigap policy is designed to pick up the 20 % Medicare does n't cover in exchange for a monthly premium payable to the carrier selected . The most comprehensive Medigap policy is Plan F , which covers all of the Part A & B deductible , co-insurance and co-pays , so when the beneficiary goes to receive care their is zero out-of-pocket costs . Some plans may also provide benefits like foreign travel as well as a gym membership as part of your regular plan . Please note : when purchasing a Medigap Policy , you need to add a Stand-Alone Prescription Drug Plan to satisfy your requirement as a Medicare Beneficiary to have Part D - Prescription Drug Coverage met .
Modern Medigap plans do not include drug coverage . Some of the older plans , those issued prior to 2006 , may include a limited drug plan . If you have a Medigap plan you should consider a stand alone drug plan . The beauty of this approach is you can find a drug plan that meets your needs . When you buy a Medicare Advantage plan with built in drug coverage you take the plan they want you to have .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
To confirm whether Part B will cover Prolia and what conditions must be met to have it covered , you will need to contact Medicare directly . I believe Prolia has been covered under Medicare Part B for a number of years up to one injection every 6 months - typically required to be recommended by your physician . It can often be listed under Part D plans ' formularies as well , but as it is often administered by a doctor , it would typically be cited under Part B. Please note , Part D plans can change their coverage year to year - they are not guaranteed renewable and every plan is different . The drugs that a plan covers can change , the premiums , deductibles , copays , coinsurance , and other factors of a plan can change each year . Plans can even be terminated or replaced and therefore automatically disenroll the consumer , forcing them to select another plan . For the insured person , it 's vital they review their prescription drug coverage each year to determine what plan will best serve their needs for the coming year . When Prolia is covered under Part B , a Medicare Supplement plan might cover the other 20 % of the cost after Medicare pays it 's 80 % share . Whether the Medigap insurer will cover the other 20 % would need to be confirmed with a carrier - when it comes to drugs covered by Part B , there 's usually a couple extra conditions that have to be met for it to be covered as most drugs are covered by Part D. I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with Medicare Supplement help . Thanks very much .
No , Medigap policies do not cover drugs , but you can add a standalone Part D prescription drug plan to cover them . Medigap policies used to cover prescription drugs under plans E , H , I , and J , but these plans were removed from the marketplace several years ago . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medicare coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans do not cover drugs . They use to until a few years ago when Medigap plans E , H , I , and J were taken off of the marketplace due to changes in the Medicare laws . If you have a Medigap plan and want to have coverage for prescription drugs , you would need to secure a standalone Part D prescription drug plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . An exception to this to have insulin covered under Part B is when insulin is administered via a medically necessary insulin pump - under this scenario , an external insulin pump and the insulin may be covered as durable medical equipment . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . If you 're looking for a Medigap plan or are interested in seeing if a lower rate is available compared to your existing plan -LRB- Medigap plans are standardized -RRB- , please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Azilect is a medication that is covered under Medicare Part D -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- . You have to be enrolled in Original Medicare to get a Part D plan . You can also enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- like an HMO or PPO -RRB- that includes Part D prescription drug coverage . Any drugs that are covered under Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- are ones that get administered in a doctor 's office -LRB- injections -RRB- , certain oral anti-cancer drugs , drugs used with some types of durable medical equipment -LRB- nebulizer or external infusion pump -RRB- . Sometimes drugs are covered under very limited circumstances -LRB- certain drugs in a hospital outpatient setting -RRB- . Since it falls under Part B , you pay the 20 % of Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . If you feel like you need help paying for your Medicare prescription drug costs , you can contact Social Security -LRB- 1-800-772-1213 -RRB- to apply for Extra Help . According to CMS , Extra Help is a `` Medicare program to help people with limited income and resources pay medicare prescription drug plan costs , like premiums , deductibles , and coinsurance . ''
As of June 1 , 2010 Medigap policies no longer can offer coverage for outpatient prescription drugs . Federal requlation requires that all Medicare beneficiaries have creditable prescription drug coverage . There are four ways to accomplish this : Drug coverage via an employer plan or retirement medical plan through a prior employer . Drug coverage via a Union retiree health plan . Veteran 's Administration -LRB- VA -RRB- drug coverage , available to certain veterans . A Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Plan . All the best to you . Mark
No , Medigap plans on today 's marketplace do not cover drugs . If you have a Medigap plan or are looking to buy one , you would need to add a standalone part D prescription drug plan to cover prescription drugs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is The Best Medicare Supplement Plan ?
The best Medicare Supplement Plans in my opinion are Plans G and N. With Plan G you only have one small deductible to meet -LRB- $ 166 -RRB- and there are no copays for a doctor office visit . Rates are very competitive with Plan G among insurance today companies today . Plan N can save you money on your monthly premium if you are comfortable paying a small co-pay of $ 20 for some doctor office visits . There is a $ 50 co-pay for an Emergency Room visit that does not result in an inpatient hospital admission . Plan N has one of the lowest premiums of any of the Medicare Supplements that offer comprehensive coverage for the gaps in your Medicare Part A & B coverage .
The best Medicare supplement plan is the one that meets your needs and budget . All too often most people only look at plan F because that is the only plan that is explained to them . Plan F is a good plan but is way oversold and , in my opinion , overpriced as well
The best Medicare supplement plan is the one that does everything you need and you can afford . If you ca n't afford the plan , do n't buy it . If the plan does n't cover what you expect it to , do n't buy it . All Medicare supplement plans with the same letter are identical in every way . Once you find a plan that fits your needs and budget , buy it . Do n't ever pay too much , thinking you are getting a better policy . You are n't . #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
The cost or monthly premium of a Medicare Supplement Plan can vary widely depending on what state you live in , how old you are and your smoking status . In some cases what part of the state you live in will vary the cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan . It also depends on which plan you want . All Medicare Supplement Plans will have a letter -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan J , Plan G and so on -RRB- and any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medicare Supplement . The best way to find out what a Medicare Supplement Plan would cost you is to run a quote on our website at SummitMedigap.com . You will be able to compare Medicare Supplement Plans instantly online . We can also help answer all of your questions and help you decide on the best plan for your specific needs . You can also reach us at 1-888-407-8664 .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Find Out Who Has Life Insurance On Me ?
No person or entity can own life insurance on your life unless you gave your consent to be insured . Do you recall signing an application for life insurance or signing to authorize the release of medical information for insurance underwriting purposes ? Do you recall having a paramedical exam - blood and urine samples , questions about medical history , etc ? Ask your family members . Also ask your employer . Since 2006 , employers who insure the lives of their key employees for the benefit of the business must obtain your consent and give you notice up front plus they must report coverage they own on employees annually to the IRS . Some records of your consent should exist in files . Then contact the insurance companies involved to verify .
Yes . You may ask your family members if anyone knows of an existing policy on your life . If you are unable to do that , then you may contact an insurance company and give them your name so they can check their records . The problem is if you do n't know who owns the policy , then finding the right company is like finding a needle in a haystack . It is possible , but it may take a lot of time and effort .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
I agree with Drew with a few additions . Rates do vary and different people may get very different rates from the same company . In my experience , you 'll find that many companies are within 10-20 % of each other and it 's hard to choose based on the rate alone . My advice is to find the right agent first . If you choose based on who has the lowest rate , you 'll be changing a lot . When you find an agent that cares about covering you correctly instead of just selling the lowest rate , you 've found your agent . Spend more time finding the right agent and you 'll be happy . They may not always be the lowest , but they 'll save you big in the long run . We 're always bombarded with ads from insurance companies telling you they have the lowest rate . They 're selling you on the idea that insurance is a commodity , that everybody has the same thing , so look for the lowest price . Nothing could be further from the truth . Professional agents and advisors are out there and they care about their clients more than just the commission they earn . Find someone who loves their agent and go talk with them . I 've never had a client complain that their rates are too high after they 've had a claim and they were made whole again . I 've been out there at 2am when my client 's house just burned to the ground . I did n't do it because I earned a commission , I did it because these are my clients and I love what I do . So , make your life easier and find an agent who cares .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
Ratings are not as relevant as they once used to be . What is important , is how the policies you are looking to buy perform over time . And the best performing are n't always the best policies . If you can find an agent who really understands what it is he or she does , to me that is the most important aspect . They can guide you into finding whatever it is you seek . These days there are just too many choices for the average consumer to sort through . As agents it can be a daunting experience to match the right company/policy to the client . After 20 years , I speak from the heart . I love what I do , and I love to help the public figure things out . That is what matters most to me . Find an agent who cares and you have a winner .
Who has the cheapest life insurance or rather who has the best rates for life insurance ? The company that has the best rates for insurance at a particular age and for a specified amount varies . No one company has all the best rates . Perhaps the best way to answer this is to change the question to : How do I find the best rates for term insurance ? You could start with an online quoting service to give you a point of reference . Be sure and compare renewal rates along with the initial premium . There are more factors to consider than simply price . Which is why you would best be served by working with an independent insurance broker who can access several companies to get you the right plan at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
This really is n't an insurance question as a political one . I can only offer my opinion and it may not be agreeable to some depending on where you live . Do I think gun owners should carry liability insurance by mandate ? Yes , I do . And I will tell you why . Accidents happen . Guns get discharged accidently , hunters and hikers are accidently shot every year . What happens when the person who has been shot , but not killed ? Who pays their bills ? Who covers the cost of their care ? Should the person responsible be able to say , sorry I have no insurance , too bad for you . Someone already cited `` part '' of the 2nd amendment in a post . Let me add the other part , '' A well regulated Militia '' . I am a well regulated insurance agent , which means I am licensed for insurance sales and required to carry `` E&O -LRB- errors and omissions -RRB- insurance '' to protect the consumer . If by accident I were to cause harm , there would be coverage to help them . It 's an expense to me as I pay for this coverage . I do n't mind that much because if for some reason , by accident I created a harmful situation I would want to provide more than an I 'm sorry .
Is variable universal life worth it ? It 's going to depend on the individual who purchases it . Variable Universal Life has many `` moving parts '' that require attention . This is not a purchase and put in the drawer policy . It requires `` management '' by the individual who purchases it . These policies may require rebalancing and/or changing funding options within the choices . Anyone who purchases a VUL should have a good understanding of investment risk and what it requires for the best possible outcome . For me personally , I am not a fan of VUL as I feel some things in a portfolio should be boring , safe and consistent and offer a reasonable return . I feel traditional old fashioned whole life offers that to an individual . It becomes a personal question of how much RISK a person should have . For me , my whole life respresents a boring financial product , one that did ` nt go backwards in 2008 , when all my exciting ones did . Personally , I want something that is steady , along with something else that has more risk but greater return possibilities . Again personally speaking , I do n't feel insurance should ever be an `` at risk '' product . Just me , old school , sorry .
That is a great question ! It is possible , but I will not mislead you , it will be difficult . The majority of insurers will cap policy writing at 80-85 ; so you will need a good independent agent who can search multiple companies for you to find one that will write at his age . The second hurdle will be his health . It would be very difficult to find a company that will write if he is in a nursing home , receiving home health care , or has had any major health issues within the past couple of years . Many will decline if he 's wheelchairbound . Again , you will need a good agent that can seek out the company that will write for you . The last hurdle will be the cost . Even if you can find the company that will write his policy , it is very likely that it will be too costly to afford . I 'd hazard a guess that it would be in the hundreds of dollars a month price range , unless his health is excellent . Life insurance is one of those things where the earlier you buy it , the cheaper it is , and it hurts me to say that far too many people either through their fault or not , end up waiting far too late to buy it . Far too many wait until there has been a scare , and then it is too late , either due to health or financial concerns . You may be able to find a policy , look for an independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a specific brand name -RRB- and have them go through your options . It is my prayer for you that you can find one that fits . If you have further questions , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thank you for asking !
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Video Transcript : Next question is , `` What are the best whole life companies ? '' Well , I have to divide that into a couple of sections . One is , what are the best whole life companies for indemnification ? And what are the best whole life companies if you 're using this for supplemental income ? There are several great carriers out there that are really good dividend paying whole life contracts . If you 're using it for indemnification , you want to look at the most benevolent underwriter , because that 's the game that has to be played in permanent whole life , because you 're going to be paying this premium for the rest of your life . So , I want to find out from an indemnification or protection point of view , who gives me the best number because of my health consideration ? The secondary part is , if I 'm using whole life for an actual income play , I want to be able to use whole life and a contract that actually is going to give me more rate of return . And that 's how I look at it ; is it income , or is it indemnification ?
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
I find it interesting that no one has answered this question from back in October . Becoming a successful Life Insurance Broker is all about relationships you have with people . I recommend to individuals who want to enter this great professions to have at least 3 months of money in the bank to live on so you have time to build your business . Finding the companies to work with is easy . What you have to work at is working a market you want to get into , and start making connections . You should have a way to get in front of people and stick to it . Whether you are going to walk the street dropping into businesses or using social media you have to have a plan and follow it . I could write a paper on this however I think I nailed this question of how to become successful as a Life Insurance Broker . Find a mentor or contact me .
In order to find out who the original beneficiary is on a life insurance policy , you can refer to the policy itself . In order to determine who is the current beneficiary you would need to check with the insurance company . The company will release this information to the owner of the policy or his/her representative . You agent or broker should be able to assist you . I should point out that in Canada you can name a beneficiary of a life insurance policy in your will . Since that can cause potential issue is is not often recommended . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
No - You can name ME as your beneficiary ... . hehehe In order to buy life insurance on someone , you have to have an `` insurable interest '' ... I ca n't buy life insurance on just anyone . There has to be a connection that would harm you financially should the person pass away . Examples are your spouse , kids , other family if you have a financial interest in something together , a business partner , someone you loaned $ $ to , etc. . I bring up insurable interest because in these cases , you , or someone else facing a financial loss due to the persons death , has to be the beneficiary . Now ... if you buy life insurance on yourself , you can pretty much name any person or legal entity as the beneficiary . Leave the funds to a spouse , kids , your favorite non-profit , or to me ... Ok . Not me . So the answer of `` who can be the beneficiary '' all depends on who the insured is , the owner of the policy , and what the connection between everyone involved . have more questions -- Reach out ! - gravy
Find a good local experienced independent agent in your area who can sit down with you , discuss your needs and goals and help you find the plan that is affordable for you . Do not bow to high pressure sales tactics . Find someone you are comfortable with . You may want to interview a few agents before deciding on the one you want to do business with . A good agent will be looking out for YOUR interests . Find someone who has been in the business for a while , who knows the plans and options available to you .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is Spouse Covered Under Medicare ?
Your spouse is covered by Medicare at age 65 , either through his or her own eligibility , or -LRB- if he or she is not eligible due to their own work history -RRB- through the work history of their spouse -LRB- you -RRB- . If your spouse has not paid Medicare taxes through their own employment for at least 10 years , they can go on their spouse 's plan , but not until they turn age 65 .
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
Getting married may or may not have an effect on your insurance policy depending upon what actions you take . Technically adding your new spouse to your policy will not change your benefits but it may have an impact on your monthly costs . If you are covered under an individual major medical policy then you would see your monthly premium increased by the amount associated with your spouse 's age for the policy you have in force -LRB- this assumes you are covered under an Affordable Care Act compliant policy taken out on or after January 1 , 2014 when community rating went into effect -RRB- . If you are adding a spouse to an employer based policy then the financial impact will depend upon what your employer 's contribution is towards employees with dependents . Some employers contribute towards the health insurance premium costs of their employees and their covered dependents . Increasingly though , employers are contributing only towards the cost of the employee 's coverage and the employee is totally financially responsible for the difference in cost for adding a dependent to their coverage . To make things even more interesting , the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- does not define spouses as dependents ! So , while the practice has not become wide spread yet , some employers are not allowing spousal coverage under their group plans -LRB- dependent children must be covered according to the ACA -RRB- . What is more common is that if your spouse is employed and their employer offers health insurance and yet you still wanted to add your spouse to your coverage , the employer could assess a penalty charge above and beyond the additional premium cost for adding a spouse in this situation . Obviously the objective here is to discourage the addition of spouses whose cost and risk could be borne by another employer . So , adding a new spouse to your health insurance coverage may not be the simple transaction that it may have been in the past . You need to explore your options and determine what the financial implications are for adding a spouse to your coverage . In some situations you may find that it makes more sense financially to purchase individual health insurance coverage for your spouse than to add them onto your group 's health insurance plan . I would recommend you find a health insurance broker to assist you with this decision making process .
Yes , absent some court order , there is no mandatory requirement that a husband or wife provide health insurance for their spouse or children . When one spouse could drop their spouse from their health insurance will depend upon whether they are covered under an individual health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy and , in the case of coverage under a group policy , whether the employer uses a Section 125 plan providing for employees to pay their share of health insurance premiums on a pre-tax basis . In the group policy setting when employees are paying their premiums on a pre-tax basis then changes to coverage are limited to the annual open enrollment period or change of life status events -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , child birth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- . So , you and your spouse ca n't have a fight over the weekend and the your spouse walks into work on Monday and drops you from their group health insurance just out of spite . With individual health policies it is easier to change the coverage level at any month of the policy period . Now , thanks to ObamaCare , which somehow managed to not define a spouse as a dependent for health insurance purposes -LRB- remember `` We 've got to pass the law to find out what 's in it '' from Nancy Pelosi ? -RRB- . This has changed the potential status of spouses being defined as eligible dependents under the personnel policies of some employer 's group health plans . While relatively few employers have dropped coverage for spouses entirely , many employers are beginning to adopt personnel policies that require that employee 's spouses who are employed and have health insurance coverage available through their employer to enroll in their employer 's health plan or some are assessing a penalty or extra charge to spouses who do n't enroll in outside coverage through their employer 's plans . This may create a situation where a person may misunderstand that they are being forced off their spouse 's health plan due to a decision by the spouse 's employer and not the employee themselves .
If you are covered under an individual policy you should be able to drop them from the coverage at any time during the year . The termination would generally be for the first of the coming month as your insurance carrier may decline to do a retroactive termination of coverage due to the possibility of recent unreported claims . You should note though that in today 's environment dropping your spouse from your individual coverage could leave your spouse uninsured until the next open enrollment period , which this year begins on November 15th for an earliest effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 . If your spouse is becoming eligible for Medicare then you will want to time the termination of the spouse 's coverage to match with the effective date of their coverage under Medicare . If you are covered under a group health insurance plan and you a having your portion of your health insurance premiums taken out of your paycheck on a pre-tax basis then your employer has a Section 125 plan in place and this restricts changes an employee can make to their enrollment status outside of the group 's open enrollment period . A change of life status event as defined under IRS regulations would have to occur for you to remove your spouse from coverage outside of the open enrollment period .
That will depend upon how you are covered . If you are both covered as Employee Only at your respective employers then neither of you is covered as a dependent on the other 's health plan and you are covered subject to your plan 's benefits and your spouse is covered subject to their plan 's benefits . The same situation would apply if you were both covered under separate individual major medical plans . The issue of coordination of benefits only comes into the picture if one or both of you are covering each other as dependents on the two plans you are covered under . This is a relatively rate situation in 2014 though it was not that uncommon many years ago . If for some reason one or both spouses is covering the other as dependents then the coordination of benefits rules would apply . The spouse who is born earlier in the year will have the coverage that is deemed `` primary '' in this double coverage scenario and then the other spouse 's coverage would come in on a `` secondary '' basis and pay towards any amounts not covered by the primary plan . At most you would achieve 100 % coverage but in no case would the combined payout from both policies exceed the total claims amount .
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
Job loss is always a unsettling period in our lives and having to address your health insurance concerns only compounds things . The first thing you should look into is the feasibility of continuing your coverage through your former employer 's health plan under either your state 's continuation of coverage provisions or , if your employer has 20 + employees , under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . Unless you were terminated with cause your former employer should have provided you with information regarding your rights in this area . If you have a spouse who is employed and has health insurance coverage available through their employer this is a qualifying event for you to be added as a dependent on your spouse 's plan or for you and your spouse to both enroll in the spouse 's employer 's health plan if you had both been enrolled under your former employer 's health plan . If your spouse has access to coverage through their employer this will almost certainly make you ineligible for subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Some people , especially those with family coverage , may find paying the entire premium for the former employer 's health plan to be cost prohibitive or may not want to continue be covered under it for other reasons . Losing coverage from an employer 's group health plan is a `` Qualifying Event '' that grants you a `` Special Election Period '' under the Affordable Care Act . You have a 60-day window after losing coverage to purchase individual health insurance either directly from an insurance carrier or through the state or Federal Health Insurance Marketplace in your state . The only good reason to purchase your coverage through a government health insurance marketplace is if your income level for 2015 would qualify you for a premium subsidy and possibly for cost sharing reductions . Currently a person 's qualification for these subsidies is based upon the applicant 's projected FAMILY income for all of 2015 . So , your situation is not an uncomplicated one . SEEK OUT AN EXPERIENCED HEALTH INSURANCE BROKER WHO REPRESENTS MULTIPLE INSURANCE CARRIERS AND WHO IS LICENSED TO SELL COVERAGE IN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE FOR GUIDANCE ON THESE MATTERS . If you are in good health and pre-existing condition coverage is not a concern for you , then in the event that the options I 've listed above do n't fit your financial needs , you can consider Short Term Major Medical insurance coverage as bridge coverage if you anticipate getting another job in the weeks or months ahead . These policies are usually less expensive -LRB- sometimes significantly so -RRB- than the options discussed above and can provide protection from financial ruin in the event an illness or injury occurs while the Short Term Medical policy is in effect . PLEASE NOTE : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty so there could be tax ramifications if you are covered under such a policy for more than 90-days . This does not mean that a Short Term Medical policy is an option you should not consider but it is an option that you should choose only with a full understanding of the positives and negatives associated with this choice . Which is another reason you should seek the guidance of an experienced Health Insurance Broker .
No , Medicare is a health plan for individuals , and does not provide for dependents . Each person that receives Medicare must be eligible based on paying into Social Security taxes the required length of time -LRB- or if a spouse who did not work outside the home , based on the spouse 's contributions -RRB- and turning age 65 -LRB- or being disabled 2 + years or or a couple more situations -RRB- . If one spouse turns 65 and starts receiving Medicare , the other under-age-65 spouse , or children of the couple , can not receive Medicare based on that alone .
If you were married to a Medicare eligible spouse for at least 10 years , you may qualify for Medicare . If you are widowed , and have not remarried , and you were married to your spouse at least 9 months before your spouse 's death , you may be eligible for Medicare benefits under a spouse provision .
A little more context would have helped here . I will presume you are asking about staying on your husband 's group health insurance . Here you can get a definitive Yes and No . It really is now a matter of the husband 's employer 's personnel policies . As a general rule in 2o14 , employers who are offering group health insurance to their employees also make that coverage available to the employee 's dependents , including spouses . One of the oddities of the Affordable Care Act is that it does not define spouses as being eligible dependents . So , technically , as long as they offer coverage to dependent children , an employer could actually exclude spouses from coverage under the terms of its group health plan and be within the letter of the law . Very few employers have taken things to the extreme of completely dropping spouses from eligibility . You do , however , see a growing move to either require working spouses who have coverage available from their job to enroll in their employer 's coverage or even more commonly , such spouses are assessed a higher premium from their spouse 's health plan if they could be covered elsewhere and waive that coverage . This is an area where employer policies are evolving rapidly so it will be wise to stay up to date on these matters with your husband 's coverage .
If you are 65 or older , you can get Medicare Part A if you have n't worked , as long as your spouse or divorced spouse has worked enough hours to receive Medicare , and if your spouse or divorced spouse is at least age 62 . Also , you can get Medicare if you get Social Security . Getting Social Security benefits only requires a 10 year work history for you or a spouse , or less if the employed spouse dies at a very young age . There are some other caveats dealing with SSDI , railroad , kidney failure and more . See WEBSITELINK for more details .
No , an ex-spouse is not longer viewed as a legal dependent once the divorce is finalized . If you are covered under a group health insurance plan to which Federal COBRA guidelines apply -LRB- 20 + employee companies -RRB- then an ex-spouse can exercise their right to continue the group 's coverage for up to 36-months . Of course , the ex-spouse of the employee on the group health planis the one responsible for making the monthly premium paymentto the employer or COBRA plan administrator so payroll deduction of premium for a COBRA continuee is not done -LRB- absent a court order to that effect I would presume -RRB- . Generally the ex-spouse losing access the their former spouse 's employment based plan has to get there own health insurance . Making provisions for this is often addressed in the terms of the divorce agreement , though not as often as I would expect . Under the Affordable Care Act , divorce is a change of life status event allowing a person to purchase individual health insurance outside of the normal open enrollment period . You have 60-days after the divorce is finalized in which to purchase new coverage either on the government marketplace or in the private marketplace .
An affidavit of spousal health insurance is a legal document that may be required by an employer or governmental health plan -LRB- such as a state 's Children 's Health Insurance Plan or CHIP -RRB- that documents if the employee or applicant 's spouse is employed and if they are eligible for or covered by their employer 's group health insurance plan . This form will be used to determine if the spouse is eligible for enrollment or determine that their employer 's plan will pay in a primary capacity -LRB- pays the claim first -RRB- and the other employer 's plan or the government based health plan will pay in a secondary capacity -LRB- paying on any unpaid balance after the primary insurance carrier has paid on a claim -RRB- . Expect to see these types of forms in your workplace or if you or a family member are accessing public health insurance programs . Increasing numbers of employers , both private sector and public sector , are making efforts to move dependent spouses who have access to health insurance elsewhere off of their plans and onto the spouse 's employer 's plan . Increasingly an additional premium penalty is being applied to employees who insist on covering a spouse who has coverage available through another employer or source . And , in the more extreme circumstances some employers are declining to cover spouses at all . These actions are a result of the increasing costs of health care that employers and governmental agencies are experiencing and to a quirk in the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- that does not define a spouse as a dependent . Unfortunately , this is what happens when politician 's pass a law without reading it as was the case with the 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act .
There are a couple life insurance policies that `` cover '' both spouses . One is called a `` First to die '' policy where both spouses are insured until one of them dies . Then the surviving spouse becomes the beneficiary and the policy is terminate . IN a `` Last to die '' policy again both spouses are insured and the policy does not pay a benefit until the last of the two spouses die . Then typically the beneficiary is the estate and the policy is designed to pay the estate tax . Or the beneficiaries could be the children or anyone else . But those are the types of policies that cover both spouses in one policy .
The death of a spouse is perhaps the most emotionally traumatic event which humans experience . What would you do if your spouse died unexpectedly ? In over 55 % of married-couple families today , both marriage partners work outside the home at least part time . -LRB- 1 -RRB- Often the financial requirements to run the household substantially exceed the income of either spouse alone . If an untimely death were to occur , the inability to meet financial obligations with the single remaining spouses income might require the hasty sale of assets or , even worse , a bank foreclosure on the family residence . Life insurance is an excellent means of providing money when it is needed in these traumatic moments . Some families are fortunate enough to allow either the mother or father to stay home with small children while the other earns sufficient cash to meet household and living expenses . It is obvious that the loss of a breadwinner would create a financial calamity . Couples should consider the potential cost of replacing the services of the spouse who stays at home to care for the children . Without the deceased spouse , a surviving spouse working outside the home would face new expenditures for child care , either in the home or at a babysitter or day care center as well as someone to take the children to the doctor , dentist , piano lessons , etc. . Perhaps the surviving parent could take time off work to fulfill these obligations , but this time off work would also amount to a financial loss . Most families can help effectively remove this potential financial emergency by acquiring a life insurance policy on each spouse . Source : Statistical Abstract of the United States : 2012 , Table 700 Married-Couple Families ; data from 2009 . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
No . The only people who can be added to your health insurance is your spouse and your children -LRB- if you 're a legal guardian of another child , then they can be added as well -RRB- . Your parents would have to be under their own coverage . For senior citizens , they have Medicare available to them if they 're not on it already . If they have original Medicare -LRB- both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B -RRB- , you may want to consider adding a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- to cover the gaps in your original Medicare coverage . Original Medicare only covers about 80 % of healthcare expenses - you can have all or a portion of the other 20 % covered under a Medigap plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you are receiving Medicare and your spouse turns 65 , he/she can go on Medicare even if they have not paid Medicare taxes the required 40 quarters , due to being a stay at home worker or some other reason . If you have paid into Medicare but are not yet on Medicare , your spouse has not paid into Medicare , and your spouse turns 65 , he/she can receive Medicare if you are age 62 or older .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
When Do Insurance Companies Write Off A Car ?
That is going to vary from carrier to carrier . I have been told that if the cost of repairing the vehicle is greater than the valuation of the vehicle -LRB- which is based on a recognized system -RRB- then the carrier may choose to consider the vehicle `` totaled '' and pay up to the vehicle 's value or the policy limits which ever is lessor minus your deductible .
If you car is stolen and not recovered then the insurance company , providing you have comprehensive coverage , will determine the actual cash value of your vehicle and then write you a check for the stolen vehicle . You will have to relinquish the title over to the insurance company . If you had a loan on the vehicle the loan will be paid off first and you will receive what ever is left . If you do not have comprehensive coverage then you have no coverage for the loss . If you car is recovered then it will be determined if the car is repairable or a total loss depending on the condition the car is found in . Most insurance companies will wait 30 days to see if the car is recovered or not then just call it a loss at that point if the car is not recovered .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
You can write off qualified long term care insurance premiums , up to a limit . The long term care policy itself must also meet certain guidelines . IRS Publication 502 goes into detail about the restrictions and eligibility to write off long term care insurance premiums . Contacting your tax adviser is much simpler .
You can not claim disability premiums as a write off on your taxes as an individual . However , if you own a company and are providing disability insurance for your employees then yes you can write off your disability premiums . There is an advantage to owning disability insurance . Since you are paying the premiums , if you have a disability claim then all the proceeds or income from that plan are tax free to you . Whereas if your employer pays your premiums and he claimed them on his taxes , your disability proceeds would be taxed as income .
Possibly . If you itemize your tax return deductions , and your out of pocket -LRB- deductible , coinsurance , unreimbursed medical expenses -RRB- and you meet the guidelines for deductibility , you may be able to write off a portion of the Medicare deductible that you actually paid . If you are self employed you may also be able to write off some or all of your out of pocket expenses .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an independent life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a permanent be suitable to the need . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Realistically speaking , most people are not going to purchase enough coverage to cover every need that they have - many times this is because they ca n't / do not want to write the check for such a high amount . You should look at which are the most critical needs you want to meet , how long do you need to have each of them covered for - this will point you in the direction of how much coverage is appropriate to have and how long you will need it for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
There is no one life insurance COMPANY that is the best for doctors , although some companies are much more lenient than others regarding medical records . In my experience in writing physicians ' life insurance , many physicians treat themselves , and thus do not have the medical records that many companies require for policies with large face amounts . I have much better results with some companies than others , for that reason . Regarding what TYPE of life insurance to get , you will want to fit your policy to your need . If you have a temporary need , just as wanting your mortgage to be paid off if you died , you will save money by taking your policy in 20 or 30 year Term . If you want a vehicle for tax favored income in retirement , Indexed Universal Life works well . A knowledgeable agent can guide you through your choices so that you get the most bang for your buck . Finally , the AGENT you choose is important for doctors . Some agents will not understand the medical terms you use . Some do not know the underwriting process well enough to work with insurance companies for cases `` outside the box '' . Some will try to take advantage of what they perceive to be your `` wealth '' . Choose an agent who will treat you like a human being , who knows how to write all types of policies , and who understands underwriting enough that they can get you a fair price .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an independent life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a permanent be suitable to the need . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Realistically speaking , most people are not going to purchase enough coverage to cover every need that they have - many times this is because they ca n't / do not want to write the check for such a high amount . You should look at which are the most critical needs you want to meet , how long do you need to have each of them covered for - this will point you in the direction of how much coverage is appropriate to have and how long you will need it for . If you have any other questions or would like help with your coverage , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button , or call me at 703-665-9133 .
Once you apply for new home insurance , and have been accepted by your new company , all you have to do is contact your current agent or insurance company . I suggest doing it in writing so there is a paper trail . If you let them know you have new insurance , and tell them what day to cancel your current policy , they should take care of the request and you should get a pro-rated refund from the current carrier . DO NOT write on the bill and mail it in as most insurance companies have thousands of payments coming in every day , the bills do n't get looked at by people , so if you write a request on your bill they might not see it .
Geico only writes personal auto insurance . They do not write homeowners insurance . This can be a competitive disadvantage to Geico because many insurers offer multiple policy discounts . What this means for you , the consumer , is you get a discount on your premiums if you have your auto and home insurance with the same company . To offset this competitive advantage , Geico has arranged partnerships around the country with insurers that specialize in homeowners insurance . This partnership gives Geico the ability to match the multiple policy discounts other insurance companies offer . Their partnerships are with different companies around the country . So to find out which insurer is partnered with Geico , you need to contact Geico dirrectly . Why do insurance companies do this ? For several reasons . It is cheaper for an insurance company to service multiple policies with the same customer than one policy . So they pass on the savings in overhead to the customer . Sometimes the insurance company uses the two policies to subsidize each other . So if you have an accident with your car , the premium the insurer gets from your home insurance can sometimes subsidize the bad loss experience on the auto policy , and vice-versa .
That is a great question ! It is possible , but I will not mislead you , it will be difficult . The majority of insurers will cap policy writing at 80-85 ; so you will need a good independent agent who can search multiple companies for you to find one that will write at his age . The second hurdle will be his health . It would be very difficult to find a company that will write if he is in a nursing home , receiving home health care , or has had any major health issues within the past couple of years . Many will decline if he 's wheelchairbound . Again , you will need a good agent that can seek out the company that will write for you . The last hurdle will be the cost . Even if you can find the company that will write his policy , it is very likely that it will be too costly to afford . I 'd hazard a guess that it would be in the hundreds of dollars a month price range , unless his health is excellent . Life insurance is one of those things where the earlier you buy it , the cheaper it is , and it hurts me to say that far too many people either through their fault or not , end up waiting far too late to buy it . Far too many wait until there has been a scare , and then it is too late , either due to health or financial concerns . You may be able to find a policy , look for an independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a specific brand name -RRB- and have them go through your options . It is my prayer for you that you can find one that fits . If you have further questions , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thank you for asking !
Insurance quotes are a very detailed process which will require first finding out which insurance companies write policies in your area . Contacting insurance agents local to your area is the best way tO search . I always feel quoting with more than one insurance carrier is best . An independent agent in your area can usually quote you for three or more carriers at one time . Also , if you search for independent agents online that write insurance in your state you can get multiple quotes . Once you select an agent , you will be asked for personal information , claims history , and information specific to the home . The more you know about your home the better off you will be . Additionally , remember to get replacement cost coverage , a water backup endorsement if you have a basement , schedule any valuable personal property especially jewelry , and ask about any other coverage endorsements they have available . Request the quote in writing , so that you have the ability to review the coverage and its associated cost .
If you are using your auto for business and have your own business you can write a portion of the premium off if you have it on a personal auto policy . but if you have a business auto policy and use that car for business only then the entire premium can be written off .
The Roth IRA is a retirement savings vehicle . Choosing a Roth IRA over a traditional IRA gives you several clear advantages : 1 -RRB- Your Roth IRA grows tax free . 2 -RRB- During your retirement years you draw tax free income from your Roth IRA account . 3 -RRB- Because you 've already paid taxes on your Roth IRA , it hedges against the possibility of having a tax rate increase , thus causing more taxes to be taken out of your Roth IRA income stream during retirement . Remember , you will most likely have less write-offs when you retire . In retirement , you will have no dependents and could have your mortgage paid off . 4 -RRB- No required minimum distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- when you reach 701/2 . In retirement , you 'll thank yourself for having the foresight of a tax free income stream while your neighbors face the likelihood of an increased tax bite from their save traditional IRA .
Usually when group benefits are involved , ERISA is involved as well . In simplest terms ERISA is simply a `` did you bring gum for everybody '' law . Employees in the same `` class '' must be treated equally when it comes to group benefits where an employer takes a tax deduction . If the employer wants to write off the cost of providing a benefit , they must provide a consistent set of rules that do not exclude employees within a certain class from participating . Simply if you do it for one employee within a class , you do it for all within the class .
Underwriting appetite will vary not only from state to state but from zip codes . A strong well established company may be writing new policies in your state but may have stopped writing in a certain area . I would find a well established independent insurance agent in your area and ask if they represent more than one homeowners insurance company . Get a few quotes and ask a few simple questions . How long has the home insurance company been writing in the state ? If new , be aware of introductory rates to get new policies followed by incremental rate increases at renewal . Financial stability with the rating agencies ? You can check AM Best and Demotech for financial stability rating . What is your experience with the company 's claims process ? This is important because a company may have a competitive price but are slow to pay out on claims . If an agent represents more than one company , he may be giving you the lowest premium but if you ask , the agent may recommend another company with a little higher premium but better claims service .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
Your not supposed to keep the money the insurance company paid out for a repair . In most cases the insurance company will write a check either directly to the body shop or to both parties to guarantee the repairs are done . If the claim is minor the Insurance company may write a check directly to the insurance who then has the car repaired . If you chose not to repair the damages and keep the money I can pretty much guarantee if the damage occurs again in the same area you will be denied coverage for not fixing the damage in the first place . The insurance company will say the damage was pre-existing .
Typically ... YES ! Many people do n't realize it , but there 's pretty much always a need . You may be thinking `` I 've got my house and cars paid off , no other debts , and the kids are out of the house , so why do I still need life insurance ? '' When you 're in retirement , the 4 most common reasons why people have life insurance are income replacement , estate planning , burial expenses , and leaving a legacy behind . During your working life , structuring a combination of benefits -LRB- part of your coverage as term and part as permanent coverage -RRB- can be very beneficial because you 'll go into retirement knowing what checks you 'll be writing for your life insurance and can structure the premiums to remain fixed for life -LRB- or reducing the premiums/increasing the death benefit if you 've got a participating whole life policy -RRB- .
end question
start question
life-insurance
I Was Given The All Clear 10 Years Ago From Leukemia . Will This Affect An Application For Life Insurance ?
The diagnosis of leukemia will affect the rate or eligibility for some life insurance policies , even though over 10 years ago . For others -LRB- like a simplified issue policy that asks if you have been diagnosed or treated for leukemia in the past 10 years -RRB- , it will not make any difference at all . Contact an impaired risk specialist that offers policies from multiple companies to find the policy that has your lowest price .
Some companies will automatically decline a policy due to certain risk factors or rate higher premiums . Cancer and heart attack are some . Major operations are another . Tbis does mean you ca n't be insured . There are ways around this . Companies that deal with these risks are available , I know of someone who had seizures had operations or heart operations but was written policies on another factor of risk .
Congratulations !! That is a great question ! The simple answer is that it depends upon the amount of insurance that you would want for coverage , and the company that you choose to have insure you . I 'd suggest that you find an independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name -RRB- who can look for a policy that will not count your past illness against you . If you would like , I 'd be happy to help , just drop me a line . Thank you for asking !
The diagnosis of leukemia will affect the rate or eligibility for some life insurance policies , even though over 10 years ago . For others -LRB- like a simplified issue policy that asks if you have been diagnosed or treated for leukemia in the past 10 years -RRB- , it will not make any difference at all . Contact an impaired risk specialist that offers policies from multiple companies to find the policy that has your lowest price .
A DUI can affect life insurance rates , or even cause a decline . But if the DUI happened years ago , it may not affect your rate at all . The key factor with a DUI is how long ago it occurred ; whether there was more than one DUI ; and , if alcohol treatment was ordered , whether you continue to drink alcohol . One DUI over 5 years ago will affect rates far less than repeat DUI 's within a few years , especially if alcohol abuse/addiction is present .
Critical Illness coverage can vary depending upon the policy but as a general rule it is internal , life threatening cancer including leukemia and lymphoma . Cancer only policies may also offer coverage for skin cancers in addition to internal cancer . The outline of coverage for any policy you may be considering should give the details as to what is covered .
Gleevec is a prescription drug used to treat certain types of cancer including CML -LRB- chronic myeloid leukemia -RRB- . Prescription drugs such as Gleevec are filled on an outpatient basis and would be covered under your Medicare Part D. Verify coverage by reviewing the drug formulary of any Part D plan . Gleevec is usually tier 3 or tier 4 and may involve coinsurance .
It does not have to . It all depends on how the broker sets the context for the use of the medication . Let me give you an example . A number of years ago , a woman called me asking the exact same question . Would she be eligible for life insurance coverage now since she does take antidepressants ? This is where the broker has to delve into the personal history of the potential applicant . You have to be thorough , but you also have to tread delicately because you will be addressing sensitive personal issues . We talked a bit about her current medication program : what were the drugs , what were the dosages , when was the diagnosis , etc. . I learned about her prior history of basically self-medicating with drugs and alcohol . Very important to know , and very important to put in the proper context . In talking further , I found out about some particularly troublesome childhood experiences . She actually was a survivor of childhood abuse . This info was integral to the overall picture that was developing . Through connecting the dots , a clear and also positive life story emerged . Here was a person who had suffered severe trauma . Quite naturally , she became depressed in surviving it . Before she was able to seek professional help , she tried to treat the symptoms herself with drugs and alcohol . Not the right way to do it , but at least she was cognitive of trouble brewing internally . Eventually she fought her way through her addictions and got herself into the hands of psychiatric professionals . They gave her the therapy and medication she needed to keep her demons at bay . She became stable , compliant with treatment , and drug and alcohol free . And eligible for life insurance at a very reasonable rate . All because the current use of antidepressants was put in the context of her life history .
This is a great question and one that I just recently researched . It seemsan investigative reporter by the name of Ronald Kessler set out to answer this question . He wrote a book called The Life Insurance Game back in 1985 . He did discover definitive information that the oldest life insurance policy can be traced back to London in 1583 . The insured was a gentleman by the name of William Gybbon . Mr. Gybbon worked in London as a Salter of meat and fish used to preserve the meat . The company underwriting the plan was not clear , but the beneficiary was known to be Richard Martin . No one really knows their relationship or the face amount of the policy other than it was a one year term , but it is an interesting story . William Gybbons actually died near the end of the policy year . The underwriting company refused to pay the claim on the grounds that the contract was for a lunar year versus a calendar year . The courts ruled in favor of Richard Martin and the claim was paid . So , even 430 years ago insurance companies were playing the loophole card . Thank you for asking the question , I personally love these stories .
The type of leukemia you have , when you were diagnosed , the type of treatment you had , and how long since you had your last treatment , will all enter into what type of life insurance policy you can get . Contact an agency that is specializes in impaired risk life insurance to have the most choices , and to work with someone who knows how to get your best possible rate .
Depression can affect life insurance rates very little , or it can affect them a lot . The severity of the depression , whether or not there were suicidal thoughts or attempt -LRB- s -RRB- , whether there was hospitalization for depression -LRB- and if so , how often and how long ago -RRB- , if the applicant is on disability for depression , how many medications are being used to treat the depression , and whether therapy is part of the treatment can all affect the rates . Mild depression treated with only one medication can result in preferred rates . A long history of depression that is resistant to treatment and has a high risk of suicide can result in a decline . In my experience , severe depression is far less common than mild depression , and most policies involving depression get rated favorably .
PIP stands for periodic payment periods . In regards to Medicare , this is the system that sends bi-weekly payments to a hospital on the PIP program and are based on the hospital 's estimate of applicable Medicare reimbursement for the current cost report period . When such payments are received , a cash account in the Unrestricted Fund is debited and a PIP Clearing Account is credited for the amount of the payment . When applicable , Medicare charges are billed to the intermediary , at which time the PIP Clearing Account is debited and patient 's account receivable is credited . At year-end , adjustments must be made to eliminate any remaining balance in the PIP Clearing Account and to reflect the amount receivable from , or due to , the Medicare intermediary .
Great question ! The simple answer is once it has passed through the underwriters and the policy is approved ; your payment -LRB- which can be paid up to 30 days from the date the application is signed for some companies , btw -RRB- has been received and processed ; and you have received and returned the `` receipt of policy '' notice that some companies will require . After those things have been accomplished , your policy will usually be in effect . Some States have rules that can affect when coverage begins also . The best thing to do is to call as soon as you see the first payment has cleared , and have them tell you the policy is active . I hope that helps , if you have more questions , contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Yes , high cholesterol DOES affect life insurance rates . It is important to disclose any and all health issues when applying for life insurance . Sometimes , you can get a slightly better rate if you disclose all issues on the application , rather than trying to hide something . In most cases , these health issues will turn up on physician reports and/or med exams and if you 're not honest up front , insurance companies will place you in a lower high-risk bracket that you did not apply for . It is important to remember that not all health issues are `` knock outs '' , especially if they happened some time ago .
If you are applying for a policy that requires an exam , there is the chance that the underwriter will want to see your medical records . As an impaired risk life insurance specialist , I have seen several cases take nearly 6 months due to the complexity , amount , and elusiveness of those applicants ' medical records . This is what I have learned , to help speed up the process . 1 -RRB- Put all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years on your application , and include the doctor who diagnosed your most serious health conditions . Delays often happen because records are received , but then the underwriter notices that the patient was referred to someone else during that time . Getting all your doctors noted at the start does not necessarily mean the insurance company will order records from all of them , but at least it gives underwriters the opportunity to pick and choose which ones they want , so they order them in a timely manner . 2 -RRB- Do your exam quickly . Putting of an exam for months sets back the whole application process . Sometimes medical records are not even ordered until the exam is done . 3 -RRB- Warn your doctor or clinic that they will be getting a request for your medical records , and ask them to fill the order ASAP . You might even want to collect your own medical records to speed things up , if that is allowed . 4 -RRB- Provide additional details in a timely manner . Sometimes insurance companies will see something on your MIB or MVR or application that will cause them to need more information . Answering that extra question , filling out that extra form , or doing whatever needs to be done , can eliminate unnecessary delays . 5 -RRB- Do n't jump to another company without talking it over with your agent first . Give him/her a chance to find out where the logjam is , and get it cleared up . If you can not get answers from your agent , it 's OK to switch , but close your first application out , or transfer it to someone else . Otherwise , you may end up applying for the same policy with two different agents , and that can cause further complications and delays .
The cost of long-term care insurance has gone up dramatically in the last 10 years . To get an affordable policy for the average person today is a real challenge for the agent . The middle class consumer has , essentially , been priced out of the market for policy designs that were frequently used 10 years ago . To get an affordable policy , the agent has to think outside the box , and the middle class consumer has to understand the value of long-term care insurance . 1 . No long-term care policy can promise to pay for all of one 's potential end-of-life health care costs , no matter how muchone pays . 2 . Conventional designs are no longer valid for the vast majority of those that want an affordable LTC insurance policy . 3 . Long-term care insurance , however , is still a very important consideration . For a base policy , figure on it costing between $ 200 - $ 400/month depending on age . 4 . Even if the policyone can afford might only pay for 1/3 to 1/2 ofone 's projected costs , it would be worth it . It 's not just about cost , although that is an important factor . LTC insurance is for the caregiver , not the insured . The entire immediate family - and sometimes the extended family - is affected by an elderly loved one that ca n't take care of routine , daily activities , and needs attention 24/7 . The emotional , psychological , and physical energy expended collectively can be a huge impact to the caregiver -LRB- s -RRB- . Being able to afford even a short break now and then from caregiving can be the difference between the caregiver remaining healthy or getting sick as well . That 's the value of long-term care insurance . Some is better than none .
Paid up life-insurance means you dont make anymore payments on the policy . You still get the coverage , but you no longer have to pay for it . But heres the question : suppose you wanted to keep paying ? Why wouldnt the insurance company allow you to do so ? I mean , some of these permanent insurance policies can get very cash rich . Whole life policies can pay some pretty hefty dividends . Universal life policies can apply a pretty decent interest rate . As I am sure you have heard , there can be some great tax advantages to accumulating wealth inside life insurance : tax-deferred accumulation , and , under the right circumstances , tax-free distributions . So why wouldnt an insurance company just let you go for it ? A number of decades ago , they did . People were taking out policies with face amounts of $ 50,000 or $ 100,000 , but putting huge amounts of cash into them . Huge amounts . They really milked the tax advantages of the product . Of course , the IRS got wise to this and imposed certain rules . These rules limit the amount of money that can grow inside these policies and still avoid taxation . You can exceed this limit , but then you get a tax bill . From this point of view , paid up means if you put more cash into the policy , you could create a taxable event . It also means something else , in consideration of the expenses of the policy . Lets say you take out a universal life product with a guarantee to age 100 . This means that given the proper payment schedule , both the premium and the death benefit will be guaranteed to a age 100 . The emphasis is on the payment schedule . If you meet it , then no more payments would be required to secure those guarantees . It would be paid up . Whats interesting here is that , depending on the product , a lot of flexibility exists for designing a payment schedule . You can have continuous pay and simply pay the lowest amount required annually . You could have a single pay in which just one payment in the first year will get you what you want . You could have a 10 pay , which means you just pay for 10 years - and still get the guarantees . You could have 20 pay . And so on . Depending on your cash flow and other factors , you could pay up your policy with any number of strategies . And then you simply would not have to worry about paying for your life insurance , even though you would have the coverage for as long as you need . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
It depends ! Like most everything in the world of life insurance , rates and qualifications for different life insurance policies vary widely from company to company . Typically , though , if your DUI was more than 5 years ago it wo n't affect your ability to get a policy . Inside of 5 years , it will , and it will also affect your rates , as most insurance companies wo n't give you their best rates if you have a DUI . This means that your DUI will cost you some extra dollars when it comes time to pay your premiums .
This has been a controversial area for several years as I presume you are asking about how to reimburse employees for the cost of individual health insurance . There had been a lot of activity which was embraced by a number of employers in past years to reimburse their employees for the cost of individual health insurance through the use of a Health Reimbursement Account -LRB- HRA -RRB- and making it a deductible business expense no different than an employer contribution to a group health insurance plan . In early 2013 the DOL and IRS issued statements that virtually every benefits professional recognized as being definitive in stating that this practice was not allowed . If an employer does not want to offer a group health insurance plan but wants to assist their employees in purchasing individual health insurance then the only practical way to do this appears to be by grossing up their pay by some amount . Of course , this is no different than giving the employees a pay raise from a tax perspective because that is exactly what you are doing . Also , this well intentioned action by the employer may have the unintended consequence of reducing or eliminating the amount of the Advanced Premium Tax subsidy that the employees might qualify for in the government health insurance marketplaces . But it is now clear than any employer support for employees purchasing their own health insurance can only be done on a post-tax basis . Depending upon a given group 's circumstances this may be a viable option to consider and is being done by some employers . This is an approach that needs to be handled with care and you should seek guidance regarding the applicability of this approach to your company 's specific situation . If you would like to learn more please feel free to contact me .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does Cash Value Mean On Life Insurance ?
A permanent life insurance policy is where you will find cash value . In your policy it is often called a non-forfeiture value . The permanent policy is designed to offer a death benefit throughout life for a set premium . While not all policies guarantee the premium the policy premium includes money that is accumulating to offset the death benefit as the age of the insured increases . At any time that there is cash value in the policy the company is willing to give you that cash value in exchange for taking away their responsibility to pay the death claim .
Cash value on a life insurance policy is the amount that the policy would be worth if it were cancelled at the point that the cash value was determined . Every carrier and policy is different . The cash value may still be subject to some fees or other charges when the policy is terminated . To know all of the coverages and exclusions afforded under the policy you should read it completely or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Permanent forms of cash value life can accumulate cash via premiums and credited earnings from interest rates , indices or equity and bond instruments in separate sub accounts offerings . Permanent forms of cash value life insurance are participating whole life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life .
That is a great question ! Simply put , there are two values to your whole life policy - the face value , or death benefit , which is what the policy would pay should you pass -LRB- minus fees or loans -RRB- , and the cash value . The cash value is the amount of money that accumulates within the policy as it grows . This is the amount that you can borrow from , or the amount -LRB- minus loans or fees -RRB- that the company would pay out to you should you surrender the policy . There is no cash value in a term life policy . I hope that helps - thanks for asking !
When you have whole life insurance it is designed so that you are building more and more cash in it each year . When a whole-life policy gets to maturity -LRB- called the endowment year -RRB- you are actually self insured . Your cash value is the same as your death benefit at that point . You can use the cash value while you are living by giving yourself low-interest loans against the cash value of your policy . You are not required to pay these loans back if you do n't want to since the cash in your policy is what guarantees the loans . The cash value is not in addition to your death benefit , it actually is part of the death benefit on whole-life policies . The remainder -LRB- cash value subtracted from the death benefit -RRB- is the remaining insured amount .
That is a great question ! One of the best things about whole life insurance is that as you pay into the policy , the cash begins to pile up in it , and is there in the event that you need to borrow from it . It is different from the surrender value , which is the amount that you would receive were you to surrender the policy . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
A permanent life insurance policy has two elements , the cost of insurance in a given year , and an accumulation fund to reduce the impact of increased premiums for insurance as you get older . The company will give you the accumulated amount as cash value anytime you are willing to stop holding them to their promise to pay the death benefit .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
The concept of borrowing from a life insurance policy , whether it is a whole life or universal life insurance policy , is taxes . The idea of cash value life insurance is the ability to accumulate cash that is tax deferred . You may later in life or in your retirement be able to borrow down your cash value . This does two good things for you . It keeps your death benefit in tact , but can lower it as cash value is depleted and because you are borrowing your own money and the insurance company is charging you very low interest rate , Uncle Sam considers the money a loan and not income . This means your money is income tax free . Always seek the advice of your agent or company . There are a few caveats that you should be aware of while you are borrowing against your cash value life insurance policy , but it can be a very effective tool for you to use in retirement . You also have the choice to repay the cash value or not . Beware of cashing out your cash value life insurance policy because those proceeds are taxable .
I am a life insurance salesman who believes that cash value life insurance should be a last resort . This product is first and foremost a way of taking care of your loved ones , your obligations , your business , and your favorite charities . Financial security means a lot here , and life insurance is a very cost-effective way to provide that . This means that someone should never buy a cash value life insurance if it means short-changing the beneficiary on survivor benefit . Having said that , cash value life insurance can be a superb way to insert guaranteed cash into your financial portfolio . I frankly have not come across another product that can match it in terms of guarantees . On top of that , favorable tax treatment make that cash build up very attractive . There are a few other vehicles that make cash and again this is the non - guaranteed portion of the policy available so quickly , and with such lenient tax treatment .
When you cancel your life insurance , what happens will depend on what type of policy you have . If you have Term Life insurance , the policy will simply end . You will not get any money back unless you had ROP Term -LRB- Return of Premium Term -RRB- and had kept the policy long enough that you are eligible to receive back part of the premiums you paid in . If you have a Permanent Life insurance policy that accumulated cash value , you will be able to receive the surrender value in cash . If you want to quit paying on your Permanent policy but do n't necessarily want to cancel your insurance , you could roll the surrender value over into another life insurance policy . Or you may have the option to change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , which means that it will be a smaller policy but you will not have to make any more payments to it . If you cancel a permanent policy in the first years , there will be a surrender charge that will reduce the cash value , and if you have loans against the policy , those will also be deducted from what you receive from the cash value , along with interest on the loans . You can request a current illustration to see what your Whole Life or Universal Life has for cash value , surrender charges and loan charges .
Universal life insurance can be variable or fixed . They are simply two different types of Universal Life . Here are the basic definitions : Variable Universal Life -LRB- VUL -RRB- is a form of life insurance that can build cash value . The cash value can be invested in separate accounts -LRB- similar to mutual funds -RRB- and the owner of the policy gets to choose which separate accounts are chosen , within the scope of what that particular product offerings are . The word `` variable '' refers to the fact the owner can invest in accounts that vary in value such as stocks and bonds . This variable component results in the cash value in your VUL increasing above or decreasing below what you put in . Universal Life -LRB- UL -RRB- is a form of permanent life insurance where the excess in premium payments are credited to the cash value of the policy . If the cash value is referenced against a stock index such as the S&P 500 , it is called an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . An IUL does not put your money in the market but rather references the performance of that market over a measured period of time -LRB- such as a year -RRB- and credits you with interest if the referenced index has increased . Typically , the cash value of an IUL will not decrease as the result of that market declining - they would simply not credit your cash value account with interest for that particular year .
This is a great question and I appreciate the opportunity to offer some answers ! Whole Life Insurance has a lot of benefits ! For one it is highly customizable in the way it may be funded . It can be set up to be funded in as little as 11 annual payments , or paid for monthly over the life of the insured up to age 100 . Whole Life policies have a Guaranteed cash accumulation feature where a guaranteed interest is paid into a cash value portion of the policy , which then becomes a liquid asset accessible at the will of the owner of the policy . The interest -LRB- as well as dividends in participating policies -RRB- is paid into the cash value Tax-FREE . And a policy may be `` over-funded '' up to about 300 % , which of course will increase the tax-free interest growth rate . In a participating policy where dividends are paid in , the dividends may be used to purchase additional insurance . This increases not only the death benefit without ever taking another medical exam or even answering questions , but also increases the dividends paid ! Whole life insurance does not expire . It remains in force -LRB- as long as the premiums are paid up -RRB- until the insured dies , the owner decides to surrender the policy -LRB- for the cash value -RRB- , or the insured reaches the age of endowment . The age of endowment varies with the policy , but may be age 95 , 99 , 100 , or now days may be as high as age 121 . When that happens the entire value of the policy is handed over to the owner of the policy . Income tax free . When paid , the death benefit passes to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- income tax free . Another option available with Whole Life Insurance is the ability to use the cash value and then to take loans from the policy death benefit to supplement retirement income ! This can be set up to be paid out monthly , quarterly or annually ... and these payments are , again , Tax-free ! So to sum up , Whole Life Insurance does not expire regardless of the possible declining health of the insured and provides a death benefit to beneficiaries that is transferred tax-free . Whole Life grows Cash Value , Tax-Free , which is a liquid asset that may be used for any purpose the owner wishes , and may be accessed without incurring a taxable event by means of a policy loan . With participating policies the cash value can increase by means of guaranteed interest and dividends , which may be used to buy additional insurance with no medical requirements . The premiums are set at the beginning of the policy and are guaranteed not to increase for any reason . And the entire premium may be paid in as little as 11 annual payments , spread out over the lifetime of the insured , or set up to be paid over a 15 , 20 or 30 year period determined by the the owner of the policy . And Whole Life Insurance may be used to supplement retirement income as a tax-free cash stream .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
The cash value is the portion of whole life insurance that has built up so far in your cash account . Think of it like money in the bank . The way whole-life is designed , it has a level premium for the length of the policy or until it is paid off . What 's really happening is as the cash account grows , the actual insured amount reduces by the same amount . You become more and more self-insured each year . If you buy $ 100,000 whole-life policy , in the begining your insured amount is $ 100,000 and your cash value is zero . Many years later your cash value is $ 40,000 and the insured amount is $ 60,000 for a total death benefit of $ 100,000 . Several more years later your cash value is $ 90,000 and the Insured amount is $ 10,000 for a death benefit of $ 100,000 If you live to age that the policy endows -LRB- usually age 95 or 100 on older policies and age 121 on newer ones -RRB- the cash value is $ 100,000 and the insured amount is zero . You are now self insured . You can use the cash value while you are living by taking policy loans which are actually loans against the cash build up in your policy not actually withdrawals from the policy or you can cash surrender the policy and walk away with the cash . If you have a participating policy that pays dividends , you can have additional cash value and death benefit build up from that .
When talking about cash value in life insurance policies it is important to differentiate between the policy value and the surrender value . For example , in a universal life insurance policy the policy value -LRB- or fund value -RRB- would be the accumulated cash value which is earning interest . However , almost all universal life insurance policies have a decreasing surrender charge schedule . This means that if you were to surrender the policy in the early years the surrender charge could reduce most -LRB- or all -RRB- of the value you receive . The value you would receive is called the net surrender value , because it is net of all charges . At some point , say 10 or 20 years down the road , the surrender charges will go away and the policy value will equal the net surrender value . This is part of the reason why cash value life insurance should always be looked at as a long term proposition .
Term life insurance has a definitive ending . If you purchase 20 year term insurance it will end in 20 years . Other types of life insurance include Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life and each of these would be considered a type of permanent life insurance . Universal Life insurance can last your entire life if structured correctly . Universal Life can have a flexible premium which will allow the excess of premium above the actual cost of insurance to be credited to the cash value of the policy . Interest is credited to the cash value each month , adding to the cash value , once policy expenses are taken out . The interest percentage is set by the insurance company . Using the same flexible premium concept , when you determine the amount of interest to be credited to the policy by referencing a financial index such as the S&P 500 , it is an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . No money is actually invested in the referenced stock market . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those required to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Best Life Insurance For My Parents ?
Many questions must be answered before we could really honestly answer this question age , health , assets , liabilities , investments etc. . So what I am saying is find a planner and be willing to lay it all on the line and let the planner search for you the best way to go . With the economy being down you are thinking on the right path be patient and search .
That 's almost a `` trick '' question ! How old are your parents ? What would be the primary purpose for this policy ? Do they have any existing life insurance ? So really then what is the best life insurance for your parents depends on their objectives , their age and what they can afford . My best advise on this would be to consult with an insurance adviser that is not tied to just one provider . And make sure you understand the benefits and length of coverage of any policy you are considering .
The best life insurance plan for your parents is the policy that accomplishes their goals . It really depends on the need for life insurance . Do they have debt to be repaid ? Do they need to shelter some money for retirement ? Or do they just need enough to cover their final expenses ? Answering these questions will determine the type and amount of life insurance your parents need .
When adult children are looking for life insurance for their parents , I find that that most common scenario is this : 1 -RRB- The parents are OK with their children doing the research , but are not crazy about doing it themselves , or may be unable to tackle that task for health or cognitive reasons . 2 -RRB- Children are usually looking for a final expense policy that will take care of their parents ' funeral and burial costs , pay off misc bills that may be present at death , and pay costs of settling the estate . 3 -RRB- The parents may go along with a minimum amount of underwriting , but may balk if there is an exam required . If that is the type of scenario you are presented with , I recommend getting a simplified issue whole life insurance policy . If your parents have serious health issues , they may need to go with a guaranteed issue whole life policy that is graded during the first 2-3 years . You will need to sit down with your parents to get their list of medications and health conditions , then contact an agent who understands final expense insurance to see if they can qualify for a simplified issue whole life policy that pays 100 % from day one for death by any reason . Some tips : 1 -RRB- You will want to go with whole life because it is certain to be in effect when death occurs , as long as premiums are paid . 2 -RRB- Look for a policy that has premiums locked in . Surprisingly , some very popular policies offered to seniors have rates that go up as they age , often making them unaffordable just at the time when they are needed . 3 -RRB- If your parents do n't want to do a telephone interview , you can get them a guaranteed issue policy that does not require a phone interview . Best wishes and please do not hesitate to contact me or other life agents on this website for assistance .
The underlying issue normally for this question is paying final expenses . If that is correct then permanent insurance is the only policy to consider because you do not know when they will die . I normally prefer whole life in this situation as it has guarantees that are easy to understand . To do this , children need to obtain the cooperation of the parents .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
Yes , a child can get life insurance for a parent . The parent must sign the application and do the exam , if an exam is required . If there is no exam required , the application process often involves a phone interview , and the parent must be able to answer the interview questions on their own . If you support your parent in any way , you can get a policy to help reimburse you after your parent passes . If you do not financially support your parent , you are still eligible to get your parent a small final expense policy . Contact an online final expense life insurance agency to get prices and types of policies available . It is a great thing you are doing ; all the best to you and your parent .
In what way do you mean ? As a college funding choice , possibly , but it would require significant investment that might be better spent on the parents to insure college . A life insurance policy on a child is a good idea for several reasons . Set up properly it is a financial cornerstone to a sound financial portfolio beginning for a child as they grow into adulthood . Imagine locking in a price that is extremely low and having it gain in value over the years into adulthood . Add the option of guaranteed insurability to the plan and you 've taken away the ability for an insurance company to say `` no '' to your child in the future . That is extremely valuable . Now , let 's look at the sad side of insurance on a child . What if you need it ? As heartbreaking as it would be to lose a child , imagine having to figure out what you can `` afford '' for a service or headstone ? Imagine how much time you 'll need off of work and what your employer would cover salary wise ? For the same reason I purchased insurance as a young single man , long before I went into this business , I did n't want a double or triple whammy for my parents who would already be dealing with my death . Throw lost wages in there and having to find the money to bury me and I 've created devastation in my household . While may God forbid , if you were to lose a child , is n't that enough ?
That 's almost a `` trick '' question ! How old are your parents ? What would be the primary purpose for this policy ? Do they have any existing life insurance ? So really then what is the best life insurance for your parents depends on their objectives , their age and what they can afford . My best advise on this would be to consult with an insurance adviser that is not tied to just one provider . And make sure you understand the benefits and length of coverage of any policy you are considering .
The best place to start in purchasing life insurance for a parent is to discuss the idea with them . They will , at a minimum , need to sign the application , so you can not do it without their knowledge . If they apply for a small , simplified issue policy , they will probably need to do a phone interview with the insurance company . If applying for a larger policy , they will need to take a life insurance exam that my include an EKG and questions to test their cognitive function . If they are not willing to participate in the application process in any way , they can get guaranteed issue life insurance -LRB- but will still need to sign the application -RRB- . In this first conversation , you can get an idea of what type of policy to look for by asking them how involved they want to get in the application process . At this time , you should also get a list of their medications and current and past health conditions . Most adult children are unaware of their parents ' complete health history . If your parent does not want to share that with you , they should contact an agent themselves , for their quote . You can find the most competitive rates for your parent at agencies that sell a selection of products . If the policy is going to be under $ 50,000 , there are agencies that specialize in those . The agency may call that type of policy Senior Life , as our agency does . Or they may call it Burial Insurance , Funeral Insurance , or Final Expense Insurance . If you are looking for a larger face amount , contact an agency that is experienced in Senior Life Insurance . If your parent has very serious health issues , Guaranteed Issue may be the way to go . Most companies will allow a child to pay for a policy for their parent . Whether or not you can own the policy will depend on a variety of factors . If you approach the purchase with the preparation explained above , it can be a very easy process and leave your parent feeling fulfilled , rather than frustrated .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
When adult children are looking for life insurance for their parents , I find that that most common scenario is this : 1 -RRB- The parents are OK with their children doing the research , but are not crazy about doing it themselves , or may be unable to tackle that task for health or cognitive reasons . 2 -RRB- Children are usually looking for a final expense policy that will take care of their parents ' funeral and burial costs , pay off misc bills that may be present at death , and pay costs of settling the estate . 3 -RRB- The parents may go along with a minimum amount of underwriting , but may balk if there is an exam required . If that is the type of scenario you are presented with , I recommend getting a simplified issue whole life insurance policy . If your parents have serious health issues , they may need to go with a guaranteed issue whole life policy that is graded during the first 2-3 years . You will need to sit down with your parents to get their list of medications and health conditions , then contact an agent who understands final expense insurance to see if they can qualify for a simplified issue whole life policy that pays 100 % from day one for death by any reason . Some tips : 1 -RRB- You will want to go with whole life because it is certain to be in effect when death occurs , as long as premiums are paid . 2 -RRB- Look for a policy that has premiums locked in . Surprisingly , some very popular policies offered to seniors have rates that go up as they age , often making them unaffordable just at the time when they are needed . 3 -RRB- If your parents do n't want to do a telephone interview , you can get them a guaranteed issue policy that does not require a phone interview . Best wishes and please do not hesitate to contact me or other life agents on this website for assistance .
Life insurance on a child should never be at the expense of life insurance on the breadwinner . Historically these policies were sold door to door on a weekly premium basis . While parents were concerned about the possible cost of the death of a child they were actually sold as savings plans . My parents gave me my paid up $ 2000 policy when I got married . Today the reason to buy such a policy is even more obscure . A small number of children become uninsurable and a very small number die ; however , this insurance might still help bring peace of mind to a parent .
You get the award for the interesting question of the day . I assume you are a dependent over age 18 to begin with but are still covered under your parents health insurance plan . If you have the financial ability to pay for your own health insurance then technically you can purchase your own coverage . However , a standard part of any insurance application is a section that asks you if you will have any other health insurance coverage in effect at the same time that you will have the policy you are applying for . This is so the insurance carrier you are applying with can coordinate their coverage with the other insurance plan you are covered under . A person can be double covered -LRB- increasingly rare these days -RRB- but you can not make a profit from being insured which would technically be feasible if you filed the same claim independently with each carrier and each insurance carrier was unaware of the other 's coverage of the claim . To notanswer this question honestlywould be toengage in fraud , which could result in claim denial and possible civil liability if the double coverage situation was uncovered . The odds are pretty good that as the claim went through the national data bases that the double coverage situation would be uncovered , it might take some time but it would probably eventually surface . Answering the question honestly , will result in your insurance carrier initiating a coordination of benefits process with your parents insurance carrier in the event of a claim . This would almost certainly result in them receiving some notification from their insurance carrier of this coordination of benefits activity and them becoming aware of the situation . While I understand everyone 's desire for privacy , as a parent myself , I would certainly want to be aware of any health care that my dependent children are receiving , especially when the parent to some extent or another is going to be paying part of the bill either as part of their basic premiums and quite likely as part of deductible and/or copay financial exposure . In essence hiding a separate insurance coverage and medical care from your parents will be very difficult to do and presents you with ethical issues you must be prepared to deal with . If you want total privacy from your parentsin these matters then you must be prepared to tell your parents you no longer want to be covered as a dependent and purchase your own coverage for which you are financially responsible .
Determining the price of life insurance for your parents depends on their age , health , and what type and amount of life insurance you are looking for . Most of the people who contact us for life insurance for their parents are looking for small final expense policies . This type of policy can usually be obtained with no exam and is Whole Life so that it will not end before death occurs . We also sell level premiums , meaning that the policy will not go up in price . Otherwise , there is a risk that the policy will become too expensive to hang onto until death occurs . For this type of policy , the price is approx $ 100/mo for a 60 year old man buying a $ 15,000 Whole Life policy that will not go up in price for the rest of his life . If there is a serious health condition , this price can be much higher , and rates will be substantially higher if the applicant is much older . Of course prices are lower if your parent is younger , and there are scores of other factors to consider . An agency that specializes in Senior Life Insurance can be helpful to find your parents life insurance that does what you want it to at the best possible price .
To get life insurance on your parents , the first step would be to gather their health information . Ask them for their medications , dates of diagnoses , treatment dates , whether they use -LRB- d -RRB- tobacco and when , and their weight now and a year ago . Often adult children think they know all these details about their parents , but it never hurts to ask . Being declined for an overlooked health reason is hard on both parents and children , and can be avoided with thorough fact finding ahead of time . Once you have this information , you can shop agencies that carry senior policies and/or final expense policies to get their best price . Some of these policies will simply require your parents to sign the application ; some will require a phone interview ; and some will require an exam . If you do not know what your parent is willing to go along with ahead of time , gather quotes for a couple different types of policies to present to them . If you are applying for a large face amount , the life insurance company will require that you have a financial interest in your parents ' lives , such as you living in their house or they living in yours . Smaller face amounts for final expense purposes will not usually have that requirement .
It may not be a good idea to get more life insurance after getting a new mortgage . You may have enough already . Heres how you could find out . Ask yourself the following : Do I have enough coverage so that my spouse can pay off the mortgage if I pass away ? What if I take out a second mortgage ? Do I have enough coverage for that as well ? What if I feel I have enough coverage for both the mortgage and my dependents - but then have another kid ? Then I would need more of the benefit to replace my income , and so would have less to cover the bank debt . How about any other family obligations ? Are my parents financially secure ? Any chance one or both would become dependent on me ? If so , that would create a demand for more coverage . Any business obligations ? Is my partnership agreement funded ? The services of my key people indemnified ? Bank debt insured ? Estate preservation ? Charitable gifts ? Can you see where I am headed with all these questions ? If you have completed a financial needs analysis , covering both current and future needs for life insurance , then you could be pretty sure whether or not you have enough coverage . If you are like most other people , you dont . You will probably end up buying another policy :-RRB- .
If your parent is age 65 or older , they qualify for Medicare so you can not typically add them onto your healthcare coverage at that point . Depending on the particular health plan you are enrolled in , you may or may not be able to add your parent onto that plan . Check the summary page in your health plan and see what it says or you can check with your health plan administrator to confirm whether they allow parents as dependents on your family plan . If your health plan allows this , here are other qualifications you will have to meet with the IRS . You must already be claiming your parent as a dependent on your federal tax filing . The IRS dependent qualifications include : Your parent is under age 65 , makes under $ 3650 per year gross income , you provide more than half of your parents ' support for the year .
I am working on a case right now in which my client has applied for 11 policies . Here is the breakdown : He is a partner in one business with two other fellows . They have just completed a buy-sell agreement and are funding the agreement with life insurance . Per the advice of their accountant and their attorney , they are purchasing several policies to cover both the current and the anticipated future value of the business . One policy will be owned by the business , and four other policies will be owned by a trust . That gives us five policies so far . My client is also a partner in a second business , with another fellow . They are following the same funding strategy . That business will own one policy , and the trust will own an additional four . Our count is now up to 10 policies . But these policies take care only of business needs . My client is also married with children . He needs life insurance for family protection . So he is purchasing yet another policy for their benefit . That gives us 11 . The underwriter is fine with this set up . My client can justify the need for all policies financially . All policies have been deemed appropriate with regard to the financial needs of the business and the financial needs of his family . And you know what ? He could buy more if he wanted to . Lets suppose he supported a number of charities . They could be religious , or social service , or political . He could take out a separate policy for each of their benefit . Five charities , five more policies . But we have another consideration . What if his net worth is over $ 5 million , and he wants to preserve his estate for his heirs ? What if he wants to avoid forcing his family to liquidate his assets just to pay Uncle Sams estate tax bill ? He could buy life insurance to cover the tax bill . Another policy . We are not done yet :-RRB- . What if his parents were financially dependent on him . It happens . What if his premature demise would put them in financial straits ? He could buy life insurance on himself for their benefit , so they could be well taken care of . Do you realize that in this scenario , this one client could take out 20 or so policies ? And it would all be financially justified and appropriate . How do you like that ? Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
My parents applied for Long Term Care Insurance many years ago , and my mother was able to qualify for it , but my father was not . My father 's declined over these many years , and toward the end , it was a worry whether my mom could continue to care for him or not . Thankfully , she was , but it was a difficult situation , to say the least . Now my mom has long term care insurance and you can tell it brings her peace . Even though she does not have anyone at home to care for her , like she did for Dad , she will have the funds to do what she needs to do if she can not care for herself . This personal experience has made it more real to me that , if you are not close to qualifying for Medicaid , you should probably have Long Term Care Insurance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Charles Schwab Offer Life Insurance ?
Charles Schwab offers life insurance from other carriers . On their website they state : `` Charles Schwab & Co. , Inc. -LRB- ` Schwab ' -RRB- , in association with the Small Business Insurance Agency , Inc. -LRB- ` SBIA ' -RRB- , provides customers with access to term life insurance issued by leading insurance companies . Schwab and SBIA are licensed insurance agencies . ''
Charles Schwab offers life insurance from other carriers . On their website they state : `` Charles Schwab & Co. , Inc. -LRB- ` Schwab ' -RRB- , in association with the Small Business Insurance Agency , Inc. -LRB- ` SBIA ' -RRB- , provides customers with access to term life insurance issued by leading insurance companies . Schwab and SBIA are licensed insurance agencies . ''
Yes , according to their website , Charles Schwab & Co , Inc , does sell annuities . Visit their website at www.schwab.com for more information . To compare the features of Schwab annuities with annuities purchased from other companies , visit a website or agent that sells annuities and call them for more information .
Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- does not cover YMCA or gym membership . Some Medicare Supplements and Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- does provide gym memberships to their clients . SIlversneakers is a popular program offered by companies that sell Medicare Advantage and Medicare Supplement Plans . When selecting a plan evaluate the premium you are paying with the benefits the plan provides , do not base your decision on whether they offer a gym membership . Premiums vary considerably between companies that offer these plans . You may save more than enough to buy a gym membership by purchasing a plan that does not offer one because the premium cost much less .
Humana offers group Term life insurance for employees , and group Term life insurance for employees ' dependents and spouses . The company also offers group Accidental Death and Dismemberment employee coverage , in addition to group AD&D coverage for the dependents and spouses of employees . Humana does not offer a private life insurance plan to individuals at this time , but does offer an Accident Benefit to individuals .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
MetLife offers life insurance that does drug test , and it also offers nonmed life insurance that does not drug test . The applications for both types of policies will ask if there has been illegal drug use in the past . One policy does a blood test and urine test , while the other just goes by what is on the application , which must be filled out honestly to prevent insurance fraud .
State Farm does not offer private Short Term Disability Insurance . At this time , the only carriers that I am aware of that offer that type of coverage are Mutual of Omaha and Assurity . State Farm does offer long term Disability Income Insurance , Mortgage Disability Income Insurance , Individual Credit Disability Insurance , and Group Disability Insurance .
As of today no one has to offer health insurance ! That will change on January 1 , 2015 when employers with 100 or more employees will have to offer health insurance to their employees or pay a penalty -LRB- tax -RRB- . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- requires employers to offer health insurance to employees and dependents that are children but does not require employers to offer health insurance to spouses of employees . On January 1 , 2016 employers with 50-99 employers will be required to offer health insurance .
Some will and some wo n't . Employer 's offer health insurance and other benefits to attract and retain quality employees , reduce turnover and to reduce absenteeism . Also , many employer 's feel a moral obligation to offer health insurance and employer sponsored health insurance is a deductible business expense so it does offer tax advantages . That said , with the introduction of the health insurance marketplaces and advanced premium tax subsidies for individual health insurance under Obamacare , these have added a new consideration for some employers . Depending upon the overall income levels of a particular employer 's workforce -LRB- a business with a lot of low to moderate income employees -RRB- it is possible that offering group health insurance could now be a disadvantage to many employees . This is because they may qualify for premium subsidies in the government marketplaces that actually make the cost of insurance less for them than having it provided by their employer . This is a very complicated issue that has a unique answer for each employer . If you would like an analysis of whether offering or continuing to offer group health insurance is right for your workforce please feel free to contact me .
No , AARP does not offer short term disability insurance , nor does it offer long term disability insurance . The best place to get short term disability insurance is through your employer , if your workplace offers it . Otherwise , there are a couple of companies that sell it to private individuals . Please contact me if you would like personal assistance .
Cigna offers group life , accident and disability insurance policies through employers , but does not sell private life insurance policies to individuals . Connecticut General Life Insurance Company -LRB- Cigna -RRB- does offer individual health insurance plans and Medicare Part D and Advantage plans , in addition to group plans for medical , dental , vision , behavioral health and pharmacy .
No , Metlife does not offer health insurance . The Metlife.com website does have a helpful page explaining what health insurance is , and tips on how to pick a good health insurance plan . The main insurance plans that Metlife offers are life insurance , disability insurance , home insurance , and auto insurance .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Allstate does offer life insurance through their subsidiaries : Allstate Life Insurance Company , Lincoln Benefit Life Insurance Company and American Heritage Life Insurance Company . To compare quotes from Life Insurance offered by Allstate with other life insurance quotes , you can visit a website with a quote engine that includes Lincoln Benefit Life .
Humana is an Insurance company that offers products for Medicare beneficiaries . These product include Medicare Supplements or Medigap insurance for gaps in coverage of Medicare Part A and Part B . These policies have different levels of coverage identified by letters . Humana offers Medicare Advantage policies or Medicare Part C. Medicare Advantage is a private insurance company providing Medicare benefits equal to Medicare Part A and Part B with some additional benefits . You are no longer using your Medicare card for benefits but will use a private insurance card and they pay for your medicare care . You have to check your county to see what Insurance companies offer these plans . Humana offers Medicare Part D which is prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries . Each county offers different plans and you would have to check to see what plans are offered in your county . Medicare is a federal health plan offered to persons who meet the qualifications .
Erie does not offer health insurance . They only offer auto , home , and life insurance . Erie is a great company based in the Northeast US.Erie does not domuch advertising which helps thererates to there insured . Look to them for auto , home or life insurance but that 's about it .
Allstate does offer life insurance through Allstate Life Insurance Company , Lincoln Benefit Life Company , American Heritage Life Insurance Company , and Allstate Life Insurance Company of New York . They offer both Term and Permanent life insurance products . To obtain a quote you can go to an agency or website selling life insurance through one of the Allstate companies . When using a quote engine , you will be able to compare their rates against the rates of other carriers .
GMAC does not offer traditional life insurance ; it 's products are mainly in the property and casualty arena and it does offer some health insurance . GMAC has a Credit Life insurance plan that pays off the balance of the debt to the lender in the event of the borrower 's death .
Liberty Mutual offers life insurance issued by Liberty Life Assurance Company of Boston , MA . The type of life insurance products that are offered by Liberty Life are Term Life , Whole Life and Universal Life . To compare the price of life insurance from Liberty Life with the price of life insurance offered by other companies , call an agency that carriers several products or find a website on the internet that will compare rates for you .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Will Renters Insurance Cover A Stolen Bicycle ?
It may . Renters insurance typically includes coverage for personal property not directly on premise . This coverage is typically up to ten percent of the policy value and may be subject to the policy deductible . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
If your personal property includes a bicycle , it will be covered under a renters policy . If the bicycle is stolen from your unit it will be covered to the property limit of the policy after satisfying the deductible . If you have a $ 400 bicycle and it is stolen , and if your policy has a $ 250 deductible , you can expect a settlement in the range of $ 150 . If the bicycle is stolen from the bicycle rack in front of the Biology building then the amount of coverage is reduced to about ten per cent of the personal property limit of the policy . Subject to that reduced limit the claim would be adjusted in the same manner .
Most personal property , including a bicycle , is covered under a renters policy . Recovery is reduced by the deductible . There are some types of property that are restricted such as jewelry , guns , collections and cash . Bicycles are not in the restricted category . If the bicycle is stolen while away from the residence it is subject to a limitation of ten percent of the insurance amount in most cases .
Your bicycle is normally classified as personal property and covered under your renters policy . This would be particularly true if it is stolen from inside your residence . However , 10 % of the limit of your policy extends to your personal property when it is not in your residence , for example in a bike rack in front of Starbucks . The settlement for such a loss is , however , subject to a deductible . If your bicycle is very expensive this could be a valuable coverage , if it is like mine , you might not recover very much .
Bicycle theft would be covered under a homeowners insurance policy . Since your deductible will apply , you may assess the replacement value of the stolen bicycle before reporting the loss . In some cases , clients are unpleasantly surprised when their insurance carrier reports a loss to CLUE -LRB- National Reporting Database for Underwriting -RRB- . It is suggested that your contact your independent agent regarding advice on your specific situation ; an experienced representative should be able to explain the complete claims procedure thus allowing you to make a more informed choice of how to proceed !
Your renters insurance may cover your bicycle if it is stolen , but it is best to talk with your insurance professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . If covered , the loss settlement would be subject to your policy deductible and more than likely you will need to provide your claims professional with a good description and proof of ownership along with a copy of a police report .
Yes , under most circumstances a bicycle would be covered if stolen as your other personal property would beup to the policy limits and possilbly less a deductible . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage offered and any exclusions that it may contain or contain your local agent to have them go over it with you .
A bicycle is personal property . Renters insurance covers personal property . The limits of the policy are stated on the declarations . Inside the policy there is a paragraph that describes the reduction in limits for personal property that is not on the premises at the time of loss . Even with this reduction most renters policies provide enough coverage to cover the loss of a bicycle . The adjustment , however , will include a reduction for the deductible . Check the deductible on your policy . If the deductible is greater than the value of your bicycle you will probably be unable to recover the cost of the bicycle .
That is a good question . Car insurance covers bicycle accident . Let say you were driving at night and hit a person on his bicycle and he is injured . Your auto insuranc would cover the bicycle damage and the person on the bike if he or she gets hurt . Good question .
If your car hits a bicycle the liability coverage in your auto policy will apply . If you have an at fault accident while riding your bicycle your automobile insurance will not provide coverage . It is possible that your homeowners or renters policy would provide coverage if your injured someone or caused property damage . This is the type of question you need to take to your personal insurance agent .
If you are riding your bicycle , and you hit an object or person , your auto insurance will not cover any damages you cause or expenses that you incur . However , if you are driving a covered vehicle on your car insurance policy and hit someone riding their bicycle your policy will protect you . The damages you cause and any bodily injury will be covered subject to your policy limits .
A bicycle is personal property so as long as you purchased personal property coverage as part of your renters insurance policy there would be coverage in the event of a theft or destroyed in a fire or other covered peril . There is no coverage if you damage -LRB- wreck -RRB- the bike . Also keep in mind your renters insurance deductible will apply . Talk to your local agent forfurtherdetails .
Renters Insurance would take effect in the event of a loss to your personal property as well as peronal liability . If someone broke into your home your renters insurance would cover the stolen items , if the building were to burn down renters insurance would cover your personal property , also if you were to have your car broken into and items stolen those items would be covered under your renters insurance .
If you mean your car having an accident with a bicycle then yes . Your auto insurance liability would cover any at fault accident , whether it is a car , bike or other structure . You collision would pay for your vehicle if damaged by a bicycle that hits you .
Bicycles are personal property . As such they are covered under your homeowners policy . Your homeowners policy has a deductible . That deductible might exceed the value of the bicycle . Often homeowners policies have earned a discount for being claims free . Sometimes losing that discount is a major issue . Contact your agent prior to submitting a claim .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
If your asking will renters insurance cover a stolen car the answer is no . Auto insurance comprehensive coverage will cover a stolen car . If you asking if any of your personal items left in the car are covered for theft then the answer is theft from a vehicle is a covered peril . Now it would depend on what the item actually was that is in question and will the stolen item meet the deductible . Also if the auto was damaged during the incident you could potentially have two claims . One one the auto for the damage to the vehicle and on for your personal property that was in the vehicle . Also please note , items permanently mounted to your auto are part of the auto .
Renters insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses and will cover your personal property `` any where in the world '' . If your belongings are stolen or damaged away from your residence most policies cover up to 10 % . For example , if you have a Renters policy with the following limits : Personal Property = $ 20,000 Liability = $ 300,000 Medical = $ 1,000 Deductible = $ 500 If your bike is stolen away from your apartment you would have coverage up to 10 % or $ 2,000 . Keep in mind your deductible . In the example above you would receive a check for $ 700 - $ 500 = $ 200 .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
In Illinois , medical coverage on an auto policy will coverexpenses for just about any kind of auto related injury , whether or not it occurred in the insured auto . For example , injuries incurred if you are struck as a pedestrian or while riding a bicycle would be covered . As always , it is best to check with your insurance professional .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Happens If My Auto Insurance Lapses ?
If you live in a state where auto insurance is required in order to maintain registration , then in many cases , like here in Connecticut , the insurance company will notify your state 's Department Of Motor Vehicles -LRB- DMV -RRB- about the lapse . DMV will send you a letter for each of the cars on your policy asking that you show proof of continuous coverage from the date of the lapse . If you have not obtained coverage elsewhere , DMV will notify you that your registrations will be suspended and then also levy a fairly hefty fine .
If your insurance lapses all coverage will cease . Any losses incurred after the lapse will not be covered . You will still be responsible for any premium outstanding on the policy . In California , the motor vehicle department will be notified . If you have a lender , the lender will be notified . At the lenders option forced coverage can be ordered . You will not be happy with the price of that coverage .
Really nothing happens when a life insurance policy lapses . That is to say the policy ends and there is no more insurance . There are a couple things that should happen = you should be notified that the policy is going to lapse and it should be explained how you can prevent that from happening . If the premiums are not paid up to keep the policy in force and it does lapse you should be notified of the provision to reinstate the policy and what steps to take and the time limit within which they must be taken .
That is an excellent question ! One of two things will happen . If the policy was paid up long ago , and has remained in effect , then it acts like any other policy , and when the insured passes , it pays out . Unfortunately , what happens most often is that Parents had a policy on the child , the parent that paid the bills passes , the policy does n't get paid , goes into grace period , and then lapses , and cancels . All those years of payments go up in smoke . Please ensure that your loved ones have a copy , or access to , your finances , sand their payment schedules , so that this does n't happen to you . I have had to have the conversation about unpaid policies far too often , and each time it breaks my heart to see the child realize there is no insurance . Thanks for asking !
A lapse in auto insurance means you went without auto insurance for a certain period of time . In many states this is a factor for rating purposes . The lapse is viewed as a time your driving record could not be verified which could potentially cause you to have higher rates . Never let your auto insurance lapse ifpossible There are exceptions such as military service that are taken into consideration .
Several things can happen if you lapse your homeowners insurance . If you carry a loan on your home your lender can force place insurance at usually a significantly higher rate simply because it is a requirement of your loan that you carry homeowners insurance . Also lapsing your homeowners insurance can make it very difficult to obtain a new policy since many carriers will not take a client who has a lapse .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Life Insurance lapses are caused by not paying the premium . When this happens you no longer have coverage . Before a policy lapses , it falls into a grace period which is an opportunity to catch up on payments . When a policy lapses you may be able to reinstate the policy however this is not guaranteed .
Old life insurance policies with paid up premium live until their insured or owner dies , then they pay out a death benefit to the beneficiary . If an old policy if allowed to lapse for non payment , one of two things happen . A term policy is lapsed and cancelled immediatelybecause as term suggests it was `` rented '' until payment is complete . On a cash value plan such as whole life oruniversal life , the cash value pays the premiums until they are exhausted and it too will lapse and cancel .
That is a great question ! The deal is that it really boils down to how well you manage your money , in my opinion . The sales pitch for a flexible premium policy is that you have the ability to be `` flexible '' with your payments - you might pay a little more than the premium , skip a payment entirely , or overpay , as you see fit . If you are the type of person that is very closely watching your expenditures , and keeps a sharp eye on your investments , then this policy type can be potentially helpful in the convenience it offers . But ... If you are like the overwhelming majority of Americans -LRB- 77 % - an unbelievable 77 % !! -RRB- that live paycheck to paycheck , part of the 66 % without adequate -LRB- or any -RRB- savings , or the 35 % with a bill currently in collections , this may not be a good thing . The Bible tells us that while `` All things are permissible , not all things are good . '' That is solid wisdom , in this case . The temptation here is to believe that the `` flexibility '' offered here provides you with more wiggle room in payments . While that is true to some degree , the truth is that there is a bottom line cost that has to be regularly covered or the policy goes under and lapses . Once it does , everything that you 've paid into it goes under also . Sadly , what happens to those who have problems with cash flow and/or money management is that they make payments that cover those costs for a while , but slowly start underpaying or skipping payments , and the result is that the minimum premium payment goes up , it becomes unaffordable , more payments are underpaid or missed , and the policy goes down like the Titanic , taking all your money with it . So it is generally my opinion and recommendation that having a single , set premium payment policy is generally a safer bet . If the payment is budgeted for , and prioritized , there is far less chance of the policy falling behind and lapsing . The offer of flexible payments is definitely tantalizing , but then again , most of the things that are bad for us generally are ... Bottom line ? If you are good with your money and keep an eye on your financial matters , there are times when having that flexibility can be helpful . If you feel that money management may be an area of opportunity for you , perhaps the stability of the fixed premium policy would be a safer choice . I hope that helps , if you have any questions , please do not hesitate to inbox me , okay ? Thank you very much for asking !
If your life insurance policy lapses , it means that your coverage has ended . In order to reinstate it , you will have to prove that your health has not changed . If that is not possible , you will have to get a new policy with new rates . In my experience , the most common reason for a policy lapsing is people moving and forgetting to tell the life insurance company their new address . This is most common if paying annually , as the post office forwarding period may not catch the notice . To avoid your policy lapsing , be sure to keep your current address and checking account on file at the insurance company . Many companies will allow you to set up a secondary address to which notices can also be sent . If you use online banking , set a warning if your life insurance premium is not paid . Treat your life insurance payment as you would or mortgage or auto loan payment . Especially if you are getting older or have had a change of health since you first purchased your policy , protecting you policy will be worth it .
That is a great question ! When you stop making payments on your policy , it will enter into what is called a `` grace period '' , and then will `` lapse '' , or end . With a term policy , that is generally no big deal , you do n't lose anything by letting that happen . Your whole life policy can be a whole different story . With the whole life policy , over time it builds a cash value , one that will be kept by the company , should you allow the policy to lapse and poof up in smoke . The better thing to do in the case of a whole life policy is to either `` surrender '' it -LRB- and get your cash back -RRB- or take it as `` paid up insurance '' , have some coverage , and no more payments . Please feel free to contact me if you need help with this , okay ? Thanks for asking !
When life insurance lapses , the coverage ends . If the insured person would pass away after the policy lapses , there would be no death benefit paid to the beneficiary . There is a 30 day grace period after the premium is due , where you can pay the premium and keep the policy from lapsing . Once it is lapsed , it must be reinstated or you need to apply for a new policy . To avoid your policy from lapsing , be sure to keep your life insurance company apprised of any change in address -LRB- if your statements are mailed to you -RRB- or change of banks -LRB- if your premium is paid by automatic withdrawal -RRB- .
What happens when your term life insurance ends ? What will happen is this : you will take out your checkbook , remember what your premium used to be , breathe heavy sigh , and then make your check payable for a much larger amount . In my career I have seen renewal premiums literally 10 times the original rate . Yes , 10 times . Doesnt always happen , but it does happen . And you will not know how high the increase will be until you get your renewal notice . They dont tell you in advance . Why would an insurance company slam you on the renewal ? Several factors could be involved . One is that they are a little bit concerned about their reserves . They need to bulk up . Another could be that they feel the credit market is a little bit tight . So they need to store up some money in case they cant go out and get enough new money . Perhaps they feel the whole block of term business is not profitable . Maybe there is a big fat insurance company lurking in the wings ready to buy them , and they consider the term business to be a liability . So they will jack up the rates to get rid of a lot of policies . -LRB- To tell you the truth , I need to learn a little bit more about this last reason myself . Most people keep paying term premiums , dont die , and then drop their policies anyway . So the insurance company has received a bunch of money without paying any out . Why not keep the renewal rates more reasonable to hold onto these customers ? -RRB- But the net result of these high renewals is that the only people who hold on to their policies are people who really need the coverage , and feel they have no other option . They feel that their medical history or lifestyle risks would make them ineligible for coverage , or make a new policy too expensive . The fact of the matter , though , is that they may indeed qualify for a better rate elsewhere . They should get prequalified and really see what the market has to offer . They may very well be surprised . And if they dont get a better deal , then the term conversion rider in their policy may be an option . As long as they are not over the maximum conversion age , they could lock into permanent rates . And they dont have to convert the entire face amount at once : it could be done in stages , to better manage cash flow . Thanks for asking . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
what happens to my life insurance when I retire ? If the life insurance is provided by your employer it will depend on what they offer . It might end immediately , it might carry on into retirement or you might be offered to carve out an individual policy from the group plan . There is n't a single answer as plans are different . If you `` own '' the policy what happens to your life insurance is what ever you want to have happen to it .
This can be different state by state , but I can advise regarding Connecticut . If you let your car insurance lapse here , a couple of things will occur . First , because the CT Department of Motor Vehicles requires by law that anyone who registers a car here must have and maintain car insurance , such a lapse can cause you serious problems down the line . Here , insurance companies and DMV share information so when a policy lapses , DMV is notified by your insurance company . DMV will send a letter requiring you to provide proof that coverage was maintained and if you can not provide such proof , regardless ofhow long the lapse , you will be fairly heavily fined . Secondly , when you do decide to establish car insurance again , you may find that it will cost you more than it did before the lapse . This is because companies have underwriting requirements that stipulate that one must maintain continuous coverage for at least the previous 6 monthsin order to qualify for standard rating . If that can not be proven , you will end up with a higher risk carrier for at least 6 months and will pay a much higher premium that you have been used to paying .
You ask if `` renters insurance cover break ins '' . I am going to assume you are asking : What happens if the apartment building burns down ? A thief broke into your apartment ? What if a guest slips and injures themselves in your kitchen ? What happens if the apartment suffers water damage ? What about all my clothing , furniture , televsions , computer , iPod , musical or sporting equipment , and my wife 's jewelry ? The answer is yes , Reneters insurance covers all the above . Smart investment .
You can switch auto insurance at any time . With more than 33 years of experience as a car insurance broker , I see this happen every day . Usually , the broker or company can be contacted to terminate coverage . Keep in mind that it 's important not to let the prior policy lapse if you are changing companies . Also , it 's important that a new policy be approved by the underwriter , as well as the broker !
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Can I Sign Up For Medicare ?
You will automatically be enrolled as soon as you qualify due to age or disability . If you do not receive your Medicare card by your 65th birthday you need to contact Social Security or call 1-800-Medicare . Make sure you are enrolled in both part A and B unless you are still under a group plan . Also be sure to select your Prescription Drug Plan -LRB- part D -RRB- even if you do not have prescriptions .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can sign up for Medicare online at medicare.gov . If you are nearing age 65 , you can sign up in the three months before or after the month of your 65th birthday . If you would rather sign up by phone , you can call 1-800-MEDICARE -LRB- 1-800-633-4227 -RRB- . Or you can go to your local Social Security Office to sign up for Medicare .
If you are age 65 and have begun receiving Social Security benefits , you will automatically be signed up for Medicare Part A and B . You can sign up for an Advantage Plan or get Medicare Part D -LRB- or other letters -RRB- at that time , as well . You sign up for Medicare by visiting your local Social Security office , going to Medicare.gov -LRB- where you will be directed to a website where you can sign up -RRB- , or calling 1-800-MEDICARE .
Medicare Part D , where do I apply ? What is the doughnut hole and how does it work ? How much does Medicare Part D cost ? Can I sign up for Part D at any time ? Which plan is the best one for me ? All good questions . The answer to where do you apply is this . You can apply through Medicare.gov You can sign up direct through a carrier Or you can find a good local insurance agent that specializes in Medicare plans
You can sign up for Medicare Part B at the same time that you sign up for Medicare Part A , or you can wait to sign up for Part B until you have stopped working and no longer have group coverage . If you are receiving Social Security benefits , you will be signed up for Part A and B automatically just before your 65th birthday .
If you signed up for Medicare Part A & Part B during your initial enrollment period , then your effective date will be either the first of the month you turn 65 -LRB- this is the case for most individuals -RRB- or 2 or 3 months after -LRB- if you signed up after the month you turned 65 -RRB- . If you decided to wait because you were still working -LRB- e.g. on a group health plan through your employer -RRB- , then you may be eligible for a special enrollment period and set up an effective date for the first of the following month -LRB- you 'll likely need to complete the Part B enrollment at your local social security office -RRB- . If you decided to wait on signing up for Part B and do not have a special enrollment period , then you would be looking at signing up during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . If you 're signing up during this window , then your effective date would be July 1 .
You can also go to the website for the Social Security Administration at www.SSA.gov for information and to sign up . One important thing to remember when signing up for Medicare in Texas is that you have a one time open enrollment period when you first sign up for Medicare Part B . This means there are no health underwriting questions and you can select any Medicare Supplement plan available . Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of your medical costs . The Medicare Supplement is designed to cover the remaining 20 % or some variation depending on what plan you go with . We have helped many clients through the Medicare Supplement process in Texas . You can compare Texas Medicare Supplement Plans instantly on our website at SummitMedigap.com or give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B online at medicare.gov . The website offers information about when and how to apply , along with a form that you can fill in and submit online . If you would rather call to sign up , you can call Social Security at1-800-772-1213 . Or you can sign up at your local Social Security office .
You should sign up for Medicare three months before reaching age 65 , even if you plan to delay receiving retirement benefits because you are working . Otherwise , your Medicare medical insurance , as well as prescription drug coverage , could be delayed , and you could be charged higher premiums . You can sign up for Medicare even if you are not ready to start receiving retirement benefits . You can opt out of receiving cash retirement benefits now once you are in the online application . Then you can apply online for retirement benefits later . Source for above : medicare.gov This also means you can sign up for a Medicare Advantage Plan or a Medicare Supplement and/or a Prescription drug plan . If you have any questions contact me or go to the site
You can buy into Medicare after age 65 . There is a general enrollment period between January 1 and March 31 of each year during which you can sign up for Medicare . If you are not eligible for free Medicare Part A , the premium you pay may be higher than if you had signed up at age 65 . However , if you did not sign up for Medicare Part A and/or B due to being covered by a group health plan , you can enroll without penalty in the 8 month period after your quit working or the group coverage ends .
You can sign up to receive Medicare benefits on the social security administration website , ssa.gov . I believe you can click on `` Medicare '' under the benefits tab . There should be some easy instructions there that will walk you through the sign up process . Signing up online is preferable for those applying during their initial enrollment period -LRB- 3 months before age 65 , the month you turn 65 , and the 3 months after you turn age 65 -RRB- . If you 're applying under special enrollment , I recommend going down to your local social security office to get your paperwork processed . Please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can sign up to receive Medicare benefits on the social security administration website , ssa.gov . I believe you can click on `` Medicare '' under the benefits tab . There should be some easy instructions there that will walk you through the sign up process . Signing up online is preferable for those applying during their initial enrollment period -LRB- 3 months before age 65 , the month you turn 65 , and the 3 months after you turn age 65 -RRB- . If you 're applying under special enrollment , I recommend going down to your local social security office to get your paperwork processed .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to the website medicare.gov . There is an online form that explains about Medicare Part B and allows you to sign up right there . Or you can visit your local Social Security office to sign up , or call Social Security at 1-800-633-4227 .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B late , but there may be penalties . If you do not enroll in Medicare Part B when you first become eligible , you can enroll during the open enrollment period from January 1 and March 31 each year . If you sign up during this period , your plan will become effective July 1 . You will be charged an additional 10 % on your premium for every 12 months you went without coverage . However , if you did n't enroll because you were covered by a different insurance plan , you can sign up during the eight months following the end of that plan without a penalty .
People were first able to sign up for Medicare on July 1 , 1966 . President Johnson signed into law the Medicare Program on July 30 , 1965 . President Johnson enrolled former President Truman as the first person on Medicare at the bill-signing ceremony . Now there is original Medicare Part A & B plus people have the choice of a Medigap Plan -LRB- Medicare Supplement Plan -RRB- or a Medicare Advantage Plan .
For most people , Medicare starts the 1st day of the month you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part A & B which covers about 80 % of the costs of care . You can also sign up for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- Medigap -RRB- to cover the difference . Medicare along with a Medicare Supplement is great health insurance . In addition , you can get a Medicare Part D plan to cover your prescription needs .
You can sign up for Medicare Part D when you turn 65 . If you are already 65 but have not previously gotten Part D because you had credible drug coverage from your employer , and you are now losing that coverage , you can sign up within 60 days of losing that coverage . There are other exceptions in which you can sign up throughout the year , but if you do n't have a `` Special Enrollment '' situation , then you would have to apply during open enrollment , which is Oct 15 - Dec 7th .
You can decline Medicare part A with several restrictions . You can not get Medicare part B without having part A. Additionally , you will face a significant penalty for signing up after age 65 if you do decline Medicare part A . The one time individuals should decline Medicare part A is if they continue to work beyond age 65 and have employer provided health insurance . In that circumstance , the individual can sign up for Medicare when they retire , leave the company , or lose employer coverage with no penalty . Contact your company HR or local Social Security office for details . The company will normally provide a document to the Social Security Administration that the individual have employer coverage up until a certain date . It is important to start the process at least three months prior to your retirement .
Most people will receive Medicare Part A without paying a premium . If you , or your spouse , paid Medicare taxes during your working years you may not have to pay a premium for Part A. Others will be required to pay up to $ 441 in 2013 . The Medicare Part B premium for 2013 for most people is $ 105 . If you fail to sign up for Part B when you are first eligible you may be required to pay a late enrollment penalty of up to 10 % per year for every year you were eligible but failed to sign up . Higher income individuals may pay a penalty . In determining your penalty premium , Medicare considers your income from prior tax returns -LRB- from 2 years ago -RRB- . The penalty plus base premium is graduated based on income and can be as much as $ 335 in 2013 .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Does Dave Ramsey Recommend Long Term Care Insurance ?
Daves approach is to eliminate debt and self-insure for extended care . The value proposition of long term care has been questioned long before Dave addressed it . And Internet posting appear to confirm his self-insure approach with a little latitude that there may be exceptions to the rule . Daves debt reduction strategies are renowned for helping people get out of debt and stay on plan .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
What does Dave Ramsey think of Annuities ? Not really sure as I do n't follow Dave Ramsey that much . Dave is the current financial `` guru '' gracing the airwaves . There were many before Dave and there will be many after Dave . While Dave 's message about getting out of debt and staying out of debt is a fine one , similar to the one my mom told me many years ago , Dave does n't always understand financial products that well as honest advice on them might conflict with his message .
I love Dave Ramsey . I listen to him and have attended his financial peace university and let me tell you , great advise . I even have his book sitting on my desk as I type this . However I can not speak on behalf Dave Ramsey but if I recall correctly Dave would say do n't spend your money on a fancy car but instead build your wealth first . Dave 's saying is `` Live like no one else so later you can live like non one else '' . Also he would say carry high liability limits to protect your assets and the highest deductibles you can afford unless a higher deductible does not make a significant enough premium difference . I would recommend hisfinancialpeace series and book and then I would go ask Dave what he thinks about auto insurance .
Dave Ramsey recommends having eight to ten times your income in term life insurance . There are a number of life insurance carriers that offer the term life insurance products that Dave Ramsey recommends , and those products can be purchased on many different websites on the internet ... the price is the same for the same product .
Dave Ramsey recommends term insurance . He endorses a specific agency . He emphasizes adequate coverage which I consider essential in any type of financial planning . Not everyone will adapt their finances to Dave Ramseys model . For those who do not it would be wise to consult with a qualified agent and determine the best way to provide the protection that you need . It could be that the answer will be term insurance but for many it is other forms of life insurance . Each of us is unique and one program does not meet the needs of everyone . There is a subculture that lives near my agency that rarely purchases term life insurance .
Dave Ramsey is a big fan of buy term life insurance and invest the rest . He cut his teeth with Priamerica here in Tennessee and the philosophy has stayed with him since he started his Financial Peace University located here in Brentwood , TN . From his radio show he usually recommends a 20 year level term which for most people is a good choice . I recommend using an independent broker to purchase the right coverage at the right price for your unique situation . Peggy is correct most of us do exactly the same as the broker Dave recommends with the same life insurance carriers .
I have read one of Dave Ramseys books but I am certainly not an expert . I think Dave Ramsey would say to have the amount of life insurance that you need in place when the need arises . A policy that has expired or is inadequate defeats the purpose of life insurance . While I realize that Dave Ramsey advocates term insurance , the key remains the same . Make sure you have enough when the need arises . If you investments reduce your risk and need for life insurance , that is fine but make sure that you have the risk covered . You are valuable and you love people who will be hurt terribly if you dont make it home today .
In an article by Dave Ramsey published on Nov 13 , 2012 , for FOXBusiness , Dave answers the question , `` Is there a point where you can self-insure for long term care needs without a policy ? '' His advice is that , unless you have $ 20M in liquid assets and have $ 2M to $ 3M to set aside for long term care , go ahead and transfer that risk to a long term care insurance policy that you purchase by age 60 .
Yes , Dave Ramsey does recommend Disability Insurance . In fact he considers Long Term Disability Insurance a necessity for most full time workers . He recommends buying it through your work place if that is available . If not offered there , he says to try an association , and then buy privately if unable to get through an association . But buy it .
Dave Ramsey does not think you should buy cancer insurance or any type of specific dread disease insurance . He confuses the purpose of it with major medical health insurance . Your major medical pays your doctor bills -LRB- minus your deductibles , co-pays and premiums . -RRB- Your cancer insurance pays a lump sum amount directly to you . You can use this while you are off work with cancer to pay for food , house payment , medical bills or anything else you need . Dave Ramsey is not a good resource for insurance information .
Dave Ramsey recommends term life insurance . Dave is a buy term and invest the difference proponent . He believes in eliminating all debt and that over the years your investment in the stock marketing will accumulate enough money to fund a retirement account debt free . So , the need for permanent life insurance is unnecessary .
Dave Ramsey 's concept is that you should buy term and invest the difference . Since term insurance is less expensive initially , investing the difference in cost between term insurance and whole life insurance you will receive a greater return . In principle and theory he is right . In actual practice , statistics show that people buy term with this in mind but do not follow through on the investment portion . The result is that people are left with no insurance in their later years , because term insurance premiums increase in later years and become unaffordable . Often they end up with less savings than they would have had if they had purchased whole life . When you consider the tax friendliness of whole life , probate avoidance , and other factors Whole Life often in reality comes out on top . Dave Ramsey 's concept is not new , it has been around since A.L. Williams in the early 1980 's . Unless a person is extremely disciplined and has enough liquid cash flow , the concept of buy term and invest the difference has historically not worked for most people . Life happens , emergencies come up , expenses rise and the investment part of the plan is put on the back burner . I know some of my colleagues will disagree with me . They point to numbers on illustrations that look good in theory . I am not saying the concept wo n't work . I am pointing out the reality that unless a person truly follows through on the plan , historically it has n't for many . I see too many people end up with no insurance in their later years when they need it most . You should have at least a solid base of Whole Life . Life Insurance is not a good investment in fact it is not an investment . It is a good semi-compulsory way to save money for a later date while at the same time providing an immediate estate should you die too soon .
As a guest speaker at may Dave Ramsey classes , I 'm quite familiar with Dave 's perspective on term life versus whole life . Simply put , Dave is an advocate for getting the maximum amount of life insurance you can to protect the most valuable asset your family hasyour income . Term Life Insurance delivers the biggest `` bang for your buck '' when it comes to pure death benefit for the dollar you spend . There are many cash value benefits from a whole life policy . However , Dave 's guiding principles are to use the money that would go towards the whole life guarantees and cash value options of a whole life policy in a different form of investment . For many people , term life insurance is an appropriate solution .
Dave Ramsey recommends a lot of things that many financial experts agree and disagree with . Ramsey believes in term insurance , which is an appropriate choice in many situations . But not all situations . The best resource for determining ho much coverage you need and what carriers are the best choice , is an experienced broker . No fees and no hassle . just the best information .
Dave Ramsey generally suggests that someone carry 10 times their current annual income in life insurance . This means if you earn $ 50,000 per year , Dave would recommend that you purchase $ 500,000 in life insurance . Whether or not this is an adequate amount of life insurance depends on a few different factors regarding your financial situation . In actuality you may need more or less .
That is a great question ! Yes , Dave Ramsey does like term insurance . In Dave 's world , people actually save money , and keep enough on hand to be able to cover their burial expenses . They also are able to find tax-advantaged ways to transfer wealth to their loved ones . With 55 % of American Elder Citizens living in poverty , 66 % of our children living in poverty , and the majority of Americans living without any savings at all , I 'm not sure how well his world translates into the real one . Dave has a great program , and some solid financial advice , but if you can not save money , term will be the best choice for you only if you are too poor to afford any real coverage . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Dave Ramsey says to only consider variable annuties if you are totally debt free and have used all your tax-deferred options . Make sure you understand the fees , riders , options and surrender period associated with your annuity . Use these four mutual funds : 1 -RRB- growth , 2 -RRB- international , 3 -RRB- growth and income , and 4 -RRB- aggressive growth . Finally , Dave Ramsey says to never use annuities inside retirement options .
Yes , Dave Ramsey does like Term Life Insurance . He believes you should take out Term Life Insurance while you need the protection , all the while saving and investing on the side . Then when the term is up , his goal for you is to be `` self insured '' -LRB- have enough money that your family would no longer need life insurance if you died -RRB- . He recommends a particular agency that sells life insurance , but many of us on this website sell the same companies and are also good at helping you find the most affordable term life insurance .
Suze Orman recommends term life insurance over participating whole life insurance , which she has a disdain for . She as well as Dave Ramsey are huge proponents of term life insurance . And for financial liabilities that are time certain events , thats just fine . Generally you can only recommend what you understand . That in and of itself can eliminate your opining on an area you just dont understand .
end question
start question
annuities
Who Buys Fixed Annuities ?
That is a great question ! One of the biggest considerations in selling annuities is the clients aversion to risk . Some people are gamblers by nature , and have a high tolerance for risk . Some are not so tolerant , but are willing to take some chances , if they feel the odds are good , and have a more moderate risk tolerance . Some people are not tolerant at all . They want to know that their investment is ironclad , and know exactly what it will return . Fixed annuities are ideal vehicles for this type of person . There is little risk , and the returns are defined clearly . They are regularly purchased in plans that need to deliver clearly defined returns for that same reason . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
Fixed annuities can definitely be a great idea for seniors . The set payout creates a known , predictable income stream that helps supplement a senior 's other retirement income . They are low-risk and generate a guaranteed interest rate return . There are immediate and deferred fixed annuities and they are set up through insurance companies . If you 're already at the retirement age , you may want to consider an immediate annuity . If you 're in younger years , then a deferred annuity may be more preferable . An immediate fixed annuity makes fixed payments starting when the annuity is established that are determined by your age and the size of your annuity -LRB- how much money you put into it -RRB- . A deferred annuity accumulates over time . If you would like to look into fixed annuities in further detail and see what interest rates are available in today 's market from a number of different carriers , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name . I have an agent in my office that has a strong background in fixed annuities and can help get your program set up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
Fixed Index Annuities -LRB- FIA 's -RRB- are annuities that have the security of a guaranteed interest rate along with the potential to earn more based on the performance of a market index or indexes . Fixed Index Annuities are often interchanged with the term Equity Indexed Annuities , but FIA 's can be tied to indexes other than the stock market . The premium for a Fixed Index Annuity can go in as a simply payment or be paid over time . The potential for growth in an Indexed Annuity is greater than a Fixed Annuity due to the participation in the indexes . However , it maintains the security of the guaranteed interest rate of a Fixed Annuity .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
Indexed annuities are different from other fixed annuities because of the way it credits interest to your annuity 's value . Some fixed annuities only credit interest calculated at a rate set in the contract . Other fixed annuities also credit interest at rates set from time to time by the insurance company . Indexed Annuities credit interest using a formula based on changes in the index to which the fixed indexed annuity is linked . The formula decides how the additional interest , if any , is calculated and credited . How much additional interest you get and when you get it depends on the features of your particular contract ?
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
It all depends on your risk tolerance and financial needs . Fixed annuities are well suited for a conservative retirement saver who wants guaranteed returns . Indexed Annuities are well suited for a conservative to semi-conservative retirement saver who wants guaranteed returns with the opportunity for a higher return than a fixed annuity . Variable Annuities are well suited for an investor who does not mind taking on the risk of loss . A person should carefully asses their risk tolerance and realistically how much loss they are willing to withstand before investing in a Variable Annuity . Annuities can be a great idea depending on your retirement savings needs .
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What are the differences between fixed and variable annuities ? Well , the biggest difference would be the investment pool you work from . A fixed annuity investment choices are made by the insurance company and you receive a stated % return for that year . You do n't have to do anything . A variable annuity shifts the investment risk onto the individual and they , not the insurance company -LRB- to a degree -RRB- decide what the annuity will be invested in . The Risk shifts to the insured and while the possibility exists to outgain the fixed annuity , the possibility of loss , even loss of existing balance exists . A variable annuity REQUIRES attention to a much great degree than a fixed .
Yes , ING does sell annuities . They have a complete portfolio of annuities including : Fixed Annuities - a type of annuity that will pay you a fixed rate of return . Indexed Annuities - an annuity that credits interest based on the performance of an index . Immediate Annuities - this annuity is for someone with a lump sum of money who is interested in immediately turning that amount of money into a guaranteed income stream . Annuities are an important retirement planning vehicle with tax deferral , death benefit , and optional living benefits .
Fixed annuities invest your premium into conservative , long term securities -LRB- usually bonds -RRB- chosen by the company . These steady investments allow the company to guarantee you fixed payments later on . Your payments are also guaranteed to last a number of years or a lifetime , determined in advance . Variable annuities are invested in stocks and more risky investments which the annuity holders choose themselves . They may have some guaranteed elements , but also have the potential to pay more than a fixed annuity , or less than a fixed annuity , due to that element of risk .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Will Insurance Cover Me If I Rent A Car From My Brother ?
Are you renting your brother 's pickup for personal or business purpose ? If for personal use , your policy will be excess based to your brother policy . For example , if there is an accident , your brother 's policy will go first and if limits are exhausted , your insurance will provide coverage on the top of your brother 's policy limits . If you rent the truck for the business purpose , make sure you have Hired/Non-Owned coverage endorsement on your business liability coverage or commercial auto policy . This coverage usually runs at $ 100 - $ 200 per year and provide a great deal of coverage for cars you borrow , rent or hire to use in business . You can compare personal and business liability and auto insurance quotes on WEBSITELINK
Your auto insurance policy will typically provide you with liability coverage when you are driving a vehicle other than your own . It will not however typically provide any physical damage coverage for the vehicle . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Are you renting your brother 's pickup for personal or business purpose ? If for personal use , your policy will be excess based to your brother policy . For example , if there is an accident , your brother 's policy will go first and if limits are exhausted , your insurance will provide coverage on the top of your brother 's policy limits . If you rent the truck for the business purpose , make sure you have Hired/Non-Owned coverage endorsement on your business liability coverage or commercial auto policy . This coverage usually runs at $ 100 - $ 200 per year and provide a great deal of coverage for cars you borrow , rent or hire to use in business . You can compare personal and business liability and auto insurance quotes on WEBSITELINK
I represented Primerica for over 12 years and know from experience that it is a good company and will pay death claims in a timely manner . The only death claim that I have paid in my career was to the widow of my brother-in-law that past away unexpectedly at the age of 38 . I delivered a check for $ 338,000 to my sister-in-law and her kids since I had replaced a whole life policy with a face of $ 25,000 a year earlier . Like most other companies , Prinerica is a solid company and will be around forever . The reason I left the company and went with my present company , Capital Choice Financial Group , was that I could represent many companies giving me a competitive edge in the marketplace . Also , Capital Choice represented the same concept of Buy Term and Invest the difference and was founded by the brother-in-law of the founder of Primerica .
I am going to answer your question by giving you a true life story that I experienced with one of my elderly clients that hopefully helps you to see the `` complexity of life '' issues we all have to face . I have an elderly lady that has been a client for years , We have grown old together . She has saved money and has continued to work every day in spite of my objections . Her brother was in a nursing home and she went to see her brother without fail at least twice a week . The path she had to travel included one of these `` turn lanes '' that clears the traffic to turn left while the other lanes supposedly had the red light . One day she was making that left turn and a motorcycle hits her right hand side whell panel as she is turning . The motorcycle flies over her car and the driver is killed . The investigating officer ticketed my client for `` failing toyield right of way '' . Please remember my client has money . What if that `` family '' of that deceiased motorcycle driver sues my client for `` wrongful death '' ? I knw we all look for ways to save money but how often are `` penny wise and pound foolish ? '' .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
As Kevin stated , if your brother owes you money , or if you rely on your brother for financial support , those are reasons for which you may be allowed to buy life insurance on your brother . Another reason is if you and your brother own a business together . Getting life insurance on your brother would allow you to buy out his share from his spouse , if he would pass away . If you want to buy life insurance for your brother to cover his funeral and burial or cremation , a small policy like that may be permitted . If not , it could be easier to have your brother own the policy and you pay for it . It never hurts to ask from an agency that can shop around .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
In California , all the drivers in a household should be listed on the auto policy . The policy covers all the drivers in the household unless they are excluded . If your brother lives with you all you have to do is notify your agent . If your brother does not live with you but is going to drive your car , with your permission , you are not required to do anything . Insurance follows the car and the car will remain insured as long as the driver has your permission to operate the car .
If your brother is a business partner with you , taking out life insurance policies on each other would be an excellent way for one of you to buy the other out , if one passed away . If your brother is disabled and you have been contributing regularly to his financial well being , you could take out a life insurance policy on your brother . Both to pay for his final expenses , and also to partially repay you for your generosity to him over the years . There are other situations where taking out life insurance on your brother is legitimate in world of life insurance . There are also some situations where taking out life insurance on your brother would not be allowed . Contact a reputable agency online or locally to discuss your particular scenario .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Many siblings will buy life insurance on their brothers so that there are funds to use for funeral expenses when their brothers die . For larger face amounts , you would need to show that you and your brother share finances in some way . I.e. . You own a property or business together , you share living expenses , your brother owes you money , or vice versa .
Yes . You can buy life insurance on your brother if several factors are met : 1 -RRB- He agrees to allow you to take out a life insurance policy on his life -LRB- evidenced by him signing the paperwork as the proposed insured -RRB- . 2 -RRB- There is an insurable interest for the coverage . 3 -RRB- The policy being applied for is suitable to the need - there are limits to how much coverage can be taken out a person -LRB- generally 20-30x income - exact maximum coverage allowance varies by carrier -RRB- . After discussing the prospect of buying the insurance with your brother , you will want to talk to an experienced life insurance broker who can go through everything with you , help you evaluate how much coverage is appropriate for what you 're trying to accomplish , review your brother 's medical history -LRB- this is very very important because the medical history determines the risk classification he qualifies for - the risk classification determines the premiums you will have to pay for the coverage -RRB- , provide the proper and most accurate quotes for the coverage , and get the coverage placed in force . I hope the input is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
The cost is relatively low . Finding companies that write the coverage can be challenging . Contact a competent insurance agent for help . Understand that this coverage is in excess of the coverage already carried by the car . If you are borrowing your brothers car , and it is fully insured , the non-owned policy will only come into play if the loss exceeds the limit of your brothers policy .
You can get a life insurance policy on your brother if you have an insurable interest . This could include being his custodian , being his business partner , being responsible for his debts , and other scenarios . It would be challenging to think of an instance when you would be denied the privilege of insuring your brother . Of course , your brother has to cooperate .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
Did you know that this type of policy was first created by Dr. Marius Bernard , in 1983 in South Africa ? Dr. Bernard has a famous brother Dr. Christian Bernard who preformed the first heart transplant . Dr. Bernard saw that his brother was saving lives but destroying them financially . Group critical illness insurance is a supplemental health insurance program which is essentially a pool of money that will be given to you in lump sums for various illnesses such as stroke , heart aliments , paralysis , severe burns etc. . Depending on your illness you can receive different amounts of that pool of money . As an example , you could buy an amount of $ 50,000 which you could receive the entire amount if you had a severe stroke or a portion if you have a heart attack . The point is that once you receive the entire $ 50,000 your policy would be cancelled as all benefit had been paid out . Is it a good policy to buy ? Well I own one , with the idea being to make up deductibles and co-pays , if I have a covered problem , which are n't paid by my health insurance policy . Some other reasons to buy are loss of income or a quick remodel of your home if you need to use wheel chairs to get around .
Great question ! Insurance companies will only write a policy when it can be demonstrated that there will be a loss to you , should the insured pass away . So you could n't write a policy on the guy you met at the office , unless you could prove that you would lose income or assets if he were to pass away . The same would apply to your brother . Unless you can prove a monetary loss , it might be really hard to find a company that will issue a policy . The best way to do it ? Like Ms. Mace suggests , have your brother get his own policy , and you make the payments for it . If you need help doing that , please feel free to contact me , I 'm glad to help . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Earth Movement ?
Probably not . It is always best to check with your Insurance Professional and discuss theterms and conditons of your policy , but for the most part , there are two pretty common specific exclusions that can be found in Homeowners ' policies . One is an exclusion for any damage to your home or property caused by earth movement and the other is for damage caused by flood . In many cases , you can have earth movement coverage endorsed onto your policy , but coverage for damage caused by flood is only available by purchasing a Flood Insurance policy .
Unless you talked to your Insurance Professional and had coverage for damage caused by earth movement added to your policy , then it is unlikely that you would have any coverage for such a loss . There are two common exclusions that you would find in a homeowners ' policy and damage caused by any form of earth movement is one of them . Flood is also common exclusion , however , unlike earth movement protection which can be endorsed onto a homeowners policy in many cases , flood insurance is only available by purchasing a Flood Insurance Policy .
It is always a good idea to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy , but most modern Homeowners Insurance provide protection from a very broad variety of covered perils . So much so , it is almost easier to explain the two common things that it does not cover . The two most common exclusions in a Homeowners policy are for damage caused by Earth Movement and damage caused by Flood . In most cases , coverage for earth movement may be endorsed onto your policy but coverage for flood damage is only available by the purchase of a Flood Insurance policy .
The damage that is caused by earth movement is not covered under the basic homeowners plan . If the issue is the gradual settling that a new home invariably experiences , that isnt covered either . There are many earth movement issues in addition to earthquake . There are earth subsidence issues , sink hole issues and mine collapse . These are generally excluded risks .
The two most common exclusions found in Homeowners insurance policies have to do with damage caused by two elements : earth and water . An exclusion for damage caused by earth movement is pretty common . Earth movement can be anything from earth quake , to sink hole or erosion or the like . In many cases , coverage for this may be able to be endorsed onto your policy . Coverage for damage caused by flood is a common exclusion and this protection is only available by purchasing a Flood Insurance policy .
The perils covered under a homeowners policy are stated in the policy . The most likely damage to a pool would be earth movement . Earth movement is excluded in most homeowners policies . It is conceivable that the pool could be damaged by a covered peril . Contact your agent if you have a specific question about pool coverage .
Most if not all standard Homeowners Insurance policies list a couple of pretty common exclusions in the language of the contract . Earth movement is one of these common exclusions . That certainly included earthquake damage but also includes sink holes , any form of erosion etc. . This coverage can usually be endorsed onto your Homeowners ' contract however . The other common exclusion is Flood . Unlike earth movement , flood coverage can never be endorsed on a homeowners policy . The coverage is only available by the purchase of a separate Flood Insurance policy .
Structural damagee that is caused by a covered loss that is outlined in your policy would be covered under the terms and conditions of your policy . This really needs to be discussed with your insurance professional directly . There are things that can cause structural damage to a home that are outside of the areas that are covered in a Homeowners policy . Things like earth movement and Flood are standard exclusions for examle . You can include coverage for Earth movement in your homeowners policy in most cases , but Flood Insurance is always a separate and specific policy that needs to be purchased separately . Again talk to your insurance professional or check our the FEMA website and look for `` Flood Smart Certified '' Insurance Professionals in your area .
Most standard issue modern Homeowners ' policies these days offer a very broad range of coverage for the dwelling and your personal property as well as liability protection in the event you are held legally liable for injury to another person or damage to another perso n't property . It is best to talk to your insurance professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy as well as any coverage limitations . Two things that Homeowners Insurance consistently does not cover is damage as a result of earth movement or flood . In many cases , earth movement coverage may be endorsed onto the policy but the only way to get coverage for Flood is by purchasing a separate Flood Insurance Policy .
Good idea to check with your Insurance Professional about your particular policy , but in general , it is not likely that your Homeowners ' policy will cover a broken sewer line . For the most part , these breaks can occur due to some form of earth movement around the pipe and earth movement damage is excluded from coverage in a standard Homeowners ' policy unless endorsed onto the contract .
Your Homeowners Insurance policy provides coverage for a wide range of perils . It is best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions , and any limitations included in your policy . It is safe to say that in general , there are two perils that your Homeowners Insurance wont cover namely loos due to earth movement and loss due to flood . In most cases , coverage for earth movement -LRB- sinkhole , earthquake , mudslide etc. -RRB- can be endorsed onto your policy . Flood Insurance , however , must be purchased separately .
Generally speaking no , it does not . This is because most Homeowners Insurance policies include a specific exclusion for damage to your home or personal property caused by earth movement . Talk to your Insurance Professional about your policy and ask about amending it to include this coverage . In most cases you will find that this can be easily done . Once amended , your policy would cover for damage caused by sinkholes or other earth movement .
Check with your Insurance Professional and discuss all of the terms and conditions of your Homeowners ' policy , of course . For the most part , most modern Homeowners Insurance Policiesprotect your dwelling , other property structures and your personal belongings for a fairly broad range of covered perils . These commonly include fire , lightning , theft and so on . Your policy will , however also include some fairly specific exclusions that eliminate or limit coverage , so you need to be aware of these as well . Remember that most policies exclude coverage for damage caused by earth movement and flood . You can , in most cases , ask to have earth movement coverage endorsed onto yur policy , but the only way to protect yourself from flood loss is by purchasing a Flood Insurance Policy . In addition to the physical coverages I have just referenced , the Homeowners ' policy will also provide Liability coverage . This line of coverage protect you from losses caused by bodily injury or property damage for which you are leagally liable .
It is impportant to remember the two most common exclusions in most Homeowners policies to begin to explore this question . Flood damage is always excluded and such protection is only available through the purchase of a separate Flood Insurance policy . The other common exclusion , which more closely begins to deal with this question , is damage to property caused by earth movement . Any earth movement that you can think of usually falls into this category of exception including earth quake , sink hole , settling , frost heave etc. . So the exclusion alone , if it is found in your policy , would be enough to deny coverage for such a loss . Always talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms , conditions and exclusions in your policy .
It is always a good idea to talk with your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . In general , Homeowners insurance provides coverage for your dwelling and personal belongings if they are damaged or lost due to a covered peril . Examples of some of the most common are fire , theft , vandalism and the like . Though some companies may include some unique limitations or exclusions like wind or hurricane damage due to proximity to coastal areas for example , generally you will find that the two most common exclusions are loss due to earth movement and loss due to flood . Earth movement can range from sink hole rto earthquake as but two . This coverage may in most cases , be endorsed back into a homeowners ' policy . However , coverage for flood is oonly available through the purchase of a separate flood insurance policy .
A homeowners policy covers damage caused by a named peril . If the cracks in the foundation are the result of a specified peril , fire , wind , hail etc. the loss would be covered . There are perils that are not included such as earth movement . Earth movement would be the most likely cause of a crack in the foundation . Please consult with your agent prior to filing a claim .
Generally no , a homeowners policy will not cover damage to underground plumbing . For the most part , other than wear and tear -LRB- which is not a covered peril in such a policy -RRB- earth movement of some sort might be about the only cause of damage to such systems . Earth movement is an excluded cause of loss in a standard Homewners policy which can , however , be endorsed onto your policy . Talk to your Insurance Professional about this and all of the terms and conditions of your particular policy . That having been said , if the underground plumbing is damaged by an outside force , for example , a dump truck that drives over yoiur property , compressing the soil ad thus damaging the plumbing system , this should be covered by the contractor 's General Liability or Commercial Vehicle insurance .
You seem to be describing a Homeowners Insurance Policy , or at least a portion of such a policy . Your home and personal property are covered for loss or damage due to a range of perils listed in your policy . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . Any loss of course would be settled subject to your policy deductible . Keep in mind that in addition to what is covered , there are usually if not always two particular perils that are excluded from coverage , namely earth movement and flood . Earth movement may be endorsed onto your policy , but the ownly answer to cover yourself from loss due to a flood is separate Flood Insurance .
Like other personal property insurance policies , renters insurance will cover a a rather broad range of possible perils . You will find , however , that in many if not all cases in your state , there are two causes of loss that will be excluded from coverage . The first is damage caused by earth movement , any earth movement . This can include but not be limited to such things as erosion , sink holes and earth quakes . Talk to your insurance professional , however , about having this coverage endorsed onto your policy if you are concerned . The second is damage by Flood . There is no endorsement for this . Flood coverage is only available by purchasing a Flood Insurance policy .
There are a couple of specific exclusions that can be found pretty universally throughout Homeowners Insurance policies and they are damage caused by earth movement and that caused by flood . Coverage for earth movement can usually be endorsed onto the policy , but Flood insurance must in all cases be purchased as a separate policy .
end question
