start question
life-insurance
How Much Does Life Insurance Cost ?
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much does life insurance cost ? '' Well , it depends on your gender , your age , your smoking habits , your medical background , your history . It also depends on the exam results that you 'll take when you go and apply for insurance . It also may depend on your vocation . Do you have hazards in your vocation ? And it also depends on , do you have recreational issues , like , are you a rock climber or a scuba diver ? It matters because those are higher risks . When you also ask about what does it cost , is it going to be temporary insurance , 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 years ? Or is it going to be permanent insurance going all the way out to age 100 , maybe even farther ? When you look at all these factors and accumulate them , they 'll come up with a number that will tell you , here is your price tag .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
-- > Normal 0 How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? I doubt anyone can give you the correct answer because the cost to rebuild your home will vary considerably depending on how it is damaged . If your home is the only one damaged in your area , for instance a fire in the home , the cost to rebuild will be one number . And if a number of homes in your area are damaged or destroyed , for instance a storm or wild fire , the cost to rebuild could be significantly more as materials , labor and contractors may be in short supply and cost much more . So how does one address that possibility ? Some , not all , insurance companies offer a Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost feature that can be added to your policy . Under this feature , you are required to purchase an amount of insurance consistent with the current cost to rebuild your home at normal prices . If your home needs to be rebuilt following a loss , the amount of insurance will automatically increase to whatever you need to rebuild the same home you had before the loss . That is the only way I know of to always buy the right amount of insurance , get one that adjusts to changing loss conditions . Otherwise , its just a guessing game and if you are wrong , you lose , not the insurance company .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
Asking how much life insurance cost is like asking a realtor how much a house costs . Could be $ 30,000 or $ 30 million it depends on what you want . The factors that an agent or life insurance company would need to begin the quoting process is type of policy , how much face amount , for how long , age , build , state of residence , tobacco use andgeneral health status . From there an agent or broker can get fairly close to a premium quote but understand the underwriters have the final say on your unique premium .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
A term life insurance policy does not earn interest , either in the cash value or face amount . It does not earn interest on the cash value because there is no cash value in term life . The death benefit is exactly what you purchased , and does not grow due to interest earned . Permanent insurance does earn interest . However , it is not as simple as putting money in a savings account and having the cash grow by a certain percent . A current illustration will show how your premium is applied to the costs in your policy , and how much it will grow at the stated interest rate .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Can I Change My Medicare Part D ?
You can change your Medicare Part D prescription drug plan during the annual enrollment period , October 15th - December 7th of each year . You may be able to enroll in a new Medicare Part D plan at other times during the year if you qualify for a special enrollment period .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
To confirm whether Part B will cover Prolia and what conditions must be met to have it covered , you will need to contact Medicare directly . I believe Prolia has been covered under Medicare Part B for a number of years up to one injection every 6 months - typically required to be recommended by your physician . It can often be listed under Part D plans ' formularies as well , but as it is often administered by a doctor , it would typically be cited under Part B. Please note , Part D plans can change their coverage year to year - they are not guaranteed renewable and every plan is different . The drugs that a plan covers can change , the premiums , deductibles , copays , coinsurance , and other factors of a plan can change each year . Plans can even be terminated or replaced and therefore automatically disenroll the consumer , forcing them to select another plan . For the insured person , it 's vital they review their prescription drug coverage each year to determine what plan will best serve their needs for the coming year . When Prolia is covered under Part B , a Medicare Supplement plan might cover the other 20 % of the cost after Medicare pays it 's 80 % share . Whether the Medigap insurer will cover the other 20 % would need to be confirmed with a carrier - when it comes to drugs covered by Part B , there 's usually a couple extra conditions that have to be met for it to be covered as most drugs are covered by Part D. I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with Medicare Supplement help . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
You can only change your Medicare Part D prescription drug plan during the annual enrollment period - October 15th to December 7th of each year . If/When you change your part D plan to another part D plan , the effective date becomes January 1 of the following year . To secure a new part D plan outside of the annual enrollment period , you will need a special enrollment period , have Medicare and Medicaid , or be eligible for medicaid and/or a low income subsidy . You can look on medicare.gov to see more information regarding changing part D coverage .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
If youdefinehaving insurance coverage for your prescription drugs when you are age 65 + as `` good '' when prior to the Bush administration 's implementation of this plan seniors on traditional Medicare did n't , then Medicare Part D is definitely a good thing . In fact , some would argue that Medicare Part D , with its pesky reliance on private insurance options and marketplace competition , is the only part of Medicare that has delivered on it 's promises of expanding coverage for a high utilization population segment and managed to come in under initial cost projections . Medicare Part D is just another level of Medicare coverage specifically designed to address prescription drug coverage . As with Medicare supplement plans , different insurance carriers offer Medicare Part D plans with different levels of coverage and price points for consumers to select from during their initial eligibility period and subsequent open enrollment renewal years . This means that the consumer is obliged to shop around because not all Medicare Part D plans are created equal , far from it . Most consumers would be well served to use the services of an insurance broker who is knowledgeable in the various Medicare Part D plans available in their marketplace .
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
You can get Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage when you have Medicare Part A and/or Part B . You can purchase the plan through a broker licensed to sell Part D plans or sign up directly through the Medicare.gov website . If you do not enroll in a Part D plan when you 're first eligible , you would have to wait until the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- to get a plan - the effective date for the coverage would be January 1 of the following year . Another way to get a Part D plan outside of the AEP is qualifying for a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. coming off of group coverage -RRB- . For a full list of qualifying events and other Part D input , consult with an experienced broker -LRB- licensed for Part D coverage -RRB- or go to the Medicare.gov website . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Are you referring to a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- , a Medicare Advantage plan , or a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan ? Your original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- is provided by the federal government . You can apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan anytime during the year . You can be subject to medical underwriting -LRB- answering yes/no health questions , a phone interview with the carrier , and a prescription check -RRB- if you 're outside your initial enrollment period -LRB- when you were new to Medicare Part B -RRB- and do not have a guarantee-issue right available to you . Medical underwriting for Medicare Supplement plans can be done in less than a week . There are no exams for these products . Please note , a common concern I hear a lot from individuals looking to replace their Medicare Supplement plans is they 're worried they 're at risk of losing the existing one if they apply for a new one and get declined . This is NOT true ! Even if you apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan and get declined , you can always keep the existing plan because Medicare Supplement plans are guaranteed renewable . If you 're looking to change your prescription drug plan provider or your Medicare Advantage plan provider , you can only make a change during certain times of the year . For the most part , you can only make changes during the annual enrollment period each year -LRB- between October 15 - December 7 -RRB- with changes becoming effective January 1 . Outside of this enrollment period , you can only make changes under certain situations -LRB- known as special enrollment periods -RRB- . An example of this is if you moved outside of the plan 's service area . For a full list of situations that qualify you for special enrollment periods to make changes , please visit the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
For all intents and purposes , the answer is no . There are certain drugs , which must be prescribed , e.g. Cancer treatment drugs , that are covered under Medicare Part B. Drugs covered under Medicare Part B would also be covered under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs however are not covered by traditional Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- or Medigap supplemental insurance . An eligible Medicare beneficiary needs a Part D prescription drug plan in order to obtain drug coverage . You can enroll in a Part D plan at Medicare.gov , subject to certain enrollment period restrictions . As an alternative to a stand alone Part D plan , a beneficiary can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes Part D coverage -LRB- MAPD -RRB- . A beneficiary who enrolls in an MAPD can not have a Medigap policy or a stand alone Part D plan . It 's a good idea to find a licensed insurance agent who specializes in Medicare plans to review your needs and objectives and present you with optimal solutions .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
There are a couple of times when you can sign up for a Medicare Part D plan . When you first become eligible for Medicare , you have a seven month window of time starting three months before your 65th birthday month and ending three months after your 65th birthday month . If you are on Medicare for disability and not yet 65 , the window occurs the 22nd through 28th month of disability . You will also qualify during the window around your 65th birthday if this is the case . Every year between October 15 and December 7 you can enroll or change the Part D plan you are on . This change takes affect at the beginning of the next year . If you qualify for certain events , there are additional times that you can change or add Part D coverage . These include moving out of the area of your current plan , living in a nursing home or similar institution , qualifying for state Medicaid or losing other credible insurance coverage . If you think any of these might apply to you , contact your local broker and they will be able to help confirm the qualifying event .
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
You can get Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage when you have Medicare Part A and/or Part B . You can purchase the plan through a broker licensed to sell Part D plans or sign up directly through the Medicare.gov website . If you do not enroll in a Part D plan when you 're first eligible , you would have to wait until the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- to get a plan - the effective date for the coverage would be January 1 of the following year . Another way to get a Part D plan outside of the AEP is qualifying for a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. coming off of group coverage -RRB- . For a full list of qualifying events and other Part D input , consult with an experienced broker -LRB- licensed for Part D coverage -RRB- or go to the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you have a Medicare Part D -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- , you should be able to call your Part D insurance company to find out which pharmacies are in your area that accept your Plan . Another way to find out which pharmacies accept your Medicare Part D plan is to visit medicare.gov and choose the tab that says Drug Coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- . Scroll to the bottom of the list and select Find Health and Drug Plans . You will now be on a page titled Medicare Plan Finder . Enter your zip code in the General Search box and click on the Find Plans button . You are now on a page that is Step 1 of 4 . Complete the appropriate information for the questions asked and click the Continue to Plan Results question . Step 2 of 4 asks you to enter your drugs . Youll need to enter the name of at least one drug . Once completed , you can submit the list and youll move to Step 3 : Select Your Pharmacies . The database will show you pharmacies in your area . You can change the range of miles within your zip code from 1 , 5 , 6 , and 8 . The database provides phone numbers for the pharmacies . It is in your best interest to call the pharmacy and make sure they accept your particular Medicare Part D plan before venturing out to fill your prescription .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
This can be a bit confusing : when you use the word Part you are referring to Medicare . When you use the word Plan , you are referring to Medigap plans which are sometimes referred to as Medicare `` supplements . '' As indicated in an earlier post , Medicare Part C is Medicare Advantage . Medigap Plans are identified individually as plans A through G , and K through N There are Medigap Plans A , B , C , & D , which tends to confuse people because Medicare Has Parts A , B , C , & D. For more information on Medicare Parts A , B , C , & D , refer to page 15 in your Medicare and You 2016 handbook . For more information on all Medigap Plans , refer to page 101 in your Medicare and You 2016 handbook . You can download a copy of the Medicare and You 2016 handbook ; go to : WEBSITELINK
Once you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B , that is it . You do not need to re-enroll in Medicare . If you have a Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- sometimes referred to as Medicare Part C -RRB- you should review your current plan each year and compare it to other options . Pay attention to your ANOC -LRB- Annual Notice of Change -RRB- that usually arrives in your mailbox in September of each year . Your ANOC will let you know which changes are coming in your plan . If you have Medicare Part D -LRB- drug coverage -RRB- you should also review this plan every year . Even if your premium does not change often the coverage will change . Drugs covered under the formulary this year may not be covered next year .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Do Health Insurance Agents Make ?
Health insurance agents make anywhere from $ 0 to $ 1 million dollars per year . Yes , that is a big range . Agents -LRB- brokers -RRB- that have been in business for quite a while and that have built up their clientele will of course make the most money . Of course , they will often be paying many employees for their help and they provide service to thousands of clients .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
There are several factors to consider before making a decision for your senior Medicare needs : Foremost , will you be better off purchasing an insurance supplement , or is a Medicare Advantage plan better for you ? Those two solutions to solving your needs are different animals entirely , so make sure you educate yourself on the different advantages of each and look for only plans in your area . Some plans are county specific . Some supplements are area specific . This is one journey you do not want to take alone . So to help you make an informed decision with your agent , you of your power or attorney need to keep in mind the following items 1 . Are you eligible to change what you have ? 2 . What medications you take . 3 . How often do you go to the doctor ? 4 . How much risk are you willing to accept in return for lower premiums ? All insurance plans transfer some risk from the client to the insurance company . The less risk -LRB- deductibles and copay -RRB- on the client , the more premiums will be . Supplements that have the same letter name -LRB- PLan N , for example -RRB- theoretically cover the same items , so you should be shown what they do and do not cover , and be able to compare costs with other companies . 5 . Are you on assistance ? 6 . Are you under or over 65 ? When did you get part B ? 7 . What state and county do you live in ? 8 . Do you have extensive chronic illnesses ? 9 . Did you recently move , get married , get divorced , move in with family members ? 10 . What is the carriers financial rating and how long have they been in the Medicare Supplement or Medicare Advantage business ? These and other questions are ones I ask before making any recommendations to my clients . If you go to an independent broker who has many Medicare clients , he should have several choices to offer , as there are many companies that compete in this arena . It is n't an easy answer , hopefully the above questions will help you gather a checklist for your agent . If he or she does not ask many of these questions , or only has one solution , you might be better off to move on to a different agent
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
The where/who question is a great one !! Our belief at ' I Hate Buying Insurance ' is the UNDERWRITING is the tail that wags the dog -LRB- one of my fav southern sayings -RRB- . There are hundreds of options across the country for Term Life . Each carrier has a different underwriting appetite . Do you have 5 - 10 extra pounds to shed ? That will be a factor between when determining what health tier you qualify for . Most carrier have 4 tiers & are commonly called Standard , Standard Plus , Preferred , and Preferred Plus . Most life insurance shoppers understand that health plays a huge role in determining the `` rate '' you qualify for . Yet lifestyle , occupation , hobbies , family health history , & more play into the rate you qualify for . A top agency will work with dozens of carriers . What name , mascot , or even financial rating -LRB- do n't sweat A - vs. A + + -RRB- are all secondary to getting the best underwriting for your specific needs . One carrier may offer you Standard while a Preferred is available at a second . Another thing to consider as of this writing is a new generation of Term Life called `` Living Benefits Life '' -LRB- LBL -RRB- You DO N'T have to die to use you `` life '' insurance anymore . Several carriers offer the ability to accelerate when diagnosed with a range of Critical or Chronic Illnesses . Just think of it as accessing the bank vault early . If you were diagnosed with invasive cancer , would n't it be to get a large sum of cash to help pay for deductibles , time away from work , home health care , & travel to the hospital you need that is in a different state ? LBL life might just do all that for you My suggestion for shopping Term Life plans : 1 . If the agent or dot.com you call doesnt ask A LOT of questions about health , history , & lifestyle , RUN . All theyre doing is guessing . Accurate rates do NOT come from age , height/weight , & current tobacco use . The agent needs to interview you so youre matched with the right carrier . 2 . Dont be afraid to ask the agent , What underwriting factors lead you to this option vs. any other carrier ? 3 . See if the agent offers you a LBL option . IF NOT , it is my strong opinion that her/she is NOT on top of current trends . If an agent or dot.com is doing what is best for you , several ideas/options should be explored . If you have any questions or comments , reach out to us !
Well , what is the best major to have to be an insurance agent ? First let me qualify this by saying you do n't have to have a college degree to be an agent , nor is there really a major to become an insurance `` agent '' . You can do several business type majors that would work perfectly for working on the company side of insurance . Finance , computer science , math , accounting and so on would work for the company side . For the agent side ? A bit different . I guess I can tell you what my choices were from college . Originally a accounting/computer science major who in my 4th year decided to switch to marketing and industrial psych . The business background helped because when you are an agent you are in business for yourself and really by yourself . So understanding overhead , management , advertising are all pluses . However , I have the most mileage from the industrial psych classes . Industrial psych is workplace psych where you study why people do what they do at work . That education has helped me greatly as insurance sales as an agent really is about forming relationships and trust if you want a long term business relationship . Just remember no matter what you do , if you go into this business there will be people that love you and people that do n't . Try and focus on those who love you and let somebody else have those that do n't . Honestly there is enough to go around .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
I agree with Barry on this one , especially since there is not cost to the consumer to use an agent . You will not pay extra in your insurance premium if you choose to use an agent in the process . All insurance rates are set by the insurance commissioner in each state and can not be changed to include a fee for using an agent . Some agents may choose to charge a fee , instead of taking the insurance commission offered by the insurance company for their services , but they may not take both . So feel free to get some free advice , education and knowledge on these complicated and changing insurance plans . If you do n't you may end up on a plan that does not include your doctor because your Doctor told you he `` takes '' that insurance ... when in reality he only is on one of the insurance companies networks , not all 3 . Use the knowledge of an educated health insurance agent to make an informed decision on your health insurance ... it 's one of the most important decisions you will make to protect your family . I believe the same with Life Insurance . Make sure to glean from an educated life insurance agent before making a `` wrong '' choice . There are so many new options out there that bare further review such a the Indexed Universal Life Insurance plans where you can accumulate cash with a good rate of return and no downside risk of the market . Gaining knowledge is always a good thing ... ask the experts !
If you are looking for a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap -RRB- , there are a few ways to find a Plan . When looking for a Medicare Supplement policy , an independent insurance agent will be able to shop the market and show you what is available in your area . Independent agents are not employed by insurance companies . This means they contract with many insurance companies allowing them to find the lowest premiums available . Their flexibility also means they can help you locate an insurance company based on a health condition as well . You can contact the insurance carrier directly in some cases . While this may seem convenient , it is often more expensive and you wo n't have an agent to help you with annual rate reviews . Captive agents work for one insurance company and can only offer Medicare Supplement insurance products from that company . Premiums can vary . What 's important to note is that you do n't have any choices because the captive agent ca n't shop the Medicare insurance market for you . Researching on the internet is an option , but can be time consuming . Also keep in mind that most insurance companies do not make their premiums available to the public and will only work with a licensed insurance agent . If you are considering a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , you 'll want to make sure whoever you choose to work with will take the time to find out what plan will work well for you . Most people choose Plan F because it covers all Medicare approved bills and they do n't have to worry about deductibles , co-pays , co-insurance or excess charges . Lately , Plan G has been popular because it works just like Plan F after meeting the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F , making it more affordable for some . These are not the only Medigap Plans ... there are eight other Plans to choose from ... that is why it is wise to speak to an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance .
From me , of course . If you are like most Americans shopping for health insurance is not only about as exciting as watching paint dry but you also find yourself in a world you do n't fully understand and where the people seem to speak a foreign language . Of course , you can always go online and shop around or , even more fun , go to HealthCare.Gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace and shop there . That works for some people but millions of others have learned the painful lesson that there are a lot of factors to consider when making a purchase as important as health insurance that are very difficult to present concisely on a web site . Seek out the services of a qualified life and health insurance agent . An independent agent not tied to one specific insurance company can shop the entire marketplace for you and can be impartial . An agent with additional professional certifications such as Chartered Benefits Consultant , Certified Employee Benefits Consultant , Registered Health Underwriter are examples of professionals who have taken their education and training beyond the simple requirements to get a life and health insurance license . These are the characteristics I would recommend you look for in a health insurance agent . It does n't cost you anything extra to get these professional 's services and they do all the work , can answer your questions , and point out those not so obvious issues with provider networks , how your specific medical and/or prescription needs are covered by different plans that the average consumer often misses or does n't even know to ask about . ObamaCare has not made all health insurance policies equal , quite the opposite in fact . Ask your friends or co-workers , do an Internet search for health insurance agents , or contact me . But you 'll be glad that you got professional guidance on this matter .
I love this question ! I have clients right now who pay more for collision coverage than they could ever collect on a total loss . It make no sense at all , it 's just what they 've always done . There 's a loose formula that I use in advising my clients about insuring an older vehicle . Look on KBB.com or Edmunds and get a rough idea of what your car is worth . Do n't use the `` clean retail '' . That 's completely unrealistic . Use the average trade or rough . It 'll be closer to the truth . Also check autotrader to get a range of what the cars are being listed for . Once you have a pretty good idea of what your car is worth , compare it to the cost of your physical damage coverage . If the cost of the coverage is more than 10 % of the value , you might consider dropping the coverage . That means that , in about 2-3 years , you 'd spend more than the value of the car . If you do have an accident , you get to make the decision on whether to repair the car or replace it . You 've already saved enough to do either -LRB- if you have n't spent your savings -RRB- . Bottom line , be aware of what your vehicles are worth and act accordingly . Spending money on coverage that would n't pay much does n't make a whole lot of sense . That 's not your agent 's place to decide for you , but we deal with it a lot and can make a suggestion . Find a good agent you can trust and go through the process . You 'll save money in the long run .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
This is a great question . Homeowners insurance rates are on the rise in Oklahoma due to all of the claims activity over the past several years . There are many factors to what generates your homeowner 's insurance premium . I hope this makes sense to you and answers your question . Here are some questions that you need to answer prior to receiving a quotation . Where do you live ? Is it a rural area with a volunteer fire department or do you live in a city with a full time fire department ? In the event of a fire , how long would the response time be for the fire fighters to get to your house ? Where is the closest fire hydrant ? What 's the replacement cost of your home ? Not the value of your home . How old is your house ? What is the construction type of your house ? Brick house ? Frame ? Do you have a crawl space or a slab ? Do you have carpeted floors , tile , other ? If your home is older than 20 years , when was your roof last replaced ? Has the wiring been updated ? Has the plumbing been updated ? Do you have an alarm system ? Do you have any pets ? Any children ? Who is living in the home ? Any fireplaces or wood burning stoves ? What deductible amount are you comfortable with ? What do you do for a living ? Do you have a home business ? These are just a few of many questions that your agent or future agent should ask you . Please let me know if I can answer any additional questions or help you out in any way . All the best , Josh DeBoer Fred Daniel & Sons , Inc. www.fdands.com 918-582-8206
There are agents that are only focused on their own needs -LRB- to make the sale -RRB- but usually they do n't last long in the business . They get weeded out . In the insurance business , customers are n't stuck with their decisions . It 's not like you bought a car or a swimming pool . Usually you have a monthly payment . You always have the first 30-days that you can cancel and get a full refund . After that you can still cancel and walk away . No one is stuck with something they ca n't get out of . So bad high pressure insurance agents usually do n't last long . They make sales but their sales fall off the books and their commissions become charge-backs . They starve out . The first thing you should do is not work with an agent that is less than 3-years in the business . That will eliminate 90 % of the bad ones right there . Most experienced agents make plenty of money . We do n't have to do the wrong thing because doing the right thing is very profitable for us .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
My sick sense of humor almost tempts me to say `` No , real estate agents are specifically excluded from getting health insurance by law '' but I wo n't do that . Yes , you can get health insurance . What you do for a living has no bearing on your eligibility for health insurance , especially now that ObamaCare is in full effect regarding guaranteed issuance of policies . In my experience , most real estate agents are self-employed/1099 contractor status people and not W2 employees of an agency . So , this probably means that you will need to get individual health insurance either through your state 's government health insurance marketplace or outside of it . So , just like you would tell those `` For Sale By Owner '' folks , you need to seek out an experienced health insurance agent who can assist you in obtaining coverage . If you have been without health insurance for more than 60-days and have n't had what is called a `` change of life status event '' -LRB- marriage , divorce , childbirth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- then you are in a time frame where you would be ineligible for enrollment in true major medical insurance until the next annual open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 and the earliest your coverage could go into effect would be for January 1st , 2015 . I hate to be the one to deliver this news but that is how ObamaCare works . Your only coverage option to carry you through until then would be to take out a Short Term Medical insurance plan . There are a variety of short term medical plan options available . However , you need to be aware that short term medical plans do still use limited underwriting questions , can decline a person for coverage and they do not cover pre-existing conditions . Please feel free to contact me if you need advice or assistance in this matter .
You can buy most types of insurance without an agent . But it does n't save you any money . You pay the same . The agent is someone who understands a lot more about insurance than you do . He helps you avoid mistakes . When people are left to their own choices they make huge mistakes with insurance . In fact they tend to put huge importance on BRANDS of insurance rather than the specifics of their policy . That 's a huge mistake . You can buy without an agent . And I am an agent so I might be biased but if you show me 10-people who bought insurance without a good agent I can show you 10 - people that I can give much better choices to . The problem is most agents are less than 1-year on the job and only know a little more than you do . When you choose your agent the first thing you should ask is how long they have been a full time insurance agent . Over 5-years is good . Less than 2-years is real bad . Let them learn on other people . Also ask if the are independent or work mainly for one company . If they work mainly with one company , that 's not good unless you do n't care about price and value . Your agent is free for you . Interview several . Fire them if they do n't fit well with you . Use them to your benefit .
Your Insurance is only as good as your agent . Cheap rates does not mean the carrier is n't any good but they key is to make sure that you are covered properly and protected . I have seen time and time again that an agent will sell you something with the wrong value of your home all because they wanted to keep your business . I have use many carriers to compare rates with and Mutual companies on many occasions can cost much less . Please make sure to talk to an agent and make sure you are using a replacement cost for your home this is not the same as a appraisal that you get from the bank . Service is another thing to think about example . Our agency answers the phone 24/7 Make sure that your not stuck calling a 800 number for claims when you have a loss . Nothing is more frustrating then dealing with a loss and being told oh call this 800 number and they will take care of your claim . If your agent is n't filing the claim and actively calling your adjuster and making sure that you and your needs are taken care of then I would look to see what works best for you . Are you shopping for just the rate or are you looking for a carrier and an agent that will be there when you need it .
Getting the best life insurance quotes can be like walking a tightrope . Some agents will quote low just to get your application . Then when you are approved , they simply send you the policy , assuming you will be tired of the process and just give in and accept it.Other agents quote high because they would rather give you good news that your rate turned out lower than higher than quoted . What really matters in the end , is that you get a policy with a life insurance company that is favorable to your type of health , age , and the type of policy you get -LRB- Term , Whole Life , or Universal Life -RRB- . So no matter what quote you get , you need to pay close attention to the credentials of your agent . Some things to look at are : 1 -RRB- Are they able to shop for you from more than one company ? 2 -RRB- Do they ask questions to determine what policies and ratings you qualify for ? 3 -RRB- Do they appear to understand your health condition -LRB- s -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Do they have a following as evidenced by testimonials , referrals , etc ? 5 -RRB- If they have a website , does it have security and privacy features ? 6 -RRB- Do they appear to be sincere and honest ? If you can get in touch with an agent who has those credentials , chances are that your quote will be as accurate as possible . More importantly , no matter what your quote is , you will have the best chance at being approved at the best rate with the best company for your particular health and age .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Every State Require Car Insurance ?
The easy answer is , as of my last update , NO . But , that is not the end of the answer . While insurance may not be required , financial responsibility is required in every state . Virginia allows you to pay an `` uninsured motor vehicle fee '' and Mississippi allows you to post a bond or cash to meet the financial responsibility requirements there . Florida is also unique because of their no-fault law but that does not relieve you of the obligation to maintain financial responsibility under some circumstances .
The certification needed to sell life insurance in almost every state is that states life insurancelicense . All states do differ on core requirements . Almost all require either classroom time or online time on average 40 hours in order to produce a certificate to take the exam . There are other requirements depending on the state such as background checks and/or fingerprints . Fees differ greatly as well . Once you are licensed most states will require a continuing education program at least every two years to keep you up to date on changes in laws and procedures . Be sure and carry errors and omissions insurance as well to protect yourself . the best place to start is on your states website and look under Department of Insurance . The states requirements will be listed there .
The federal govt . does not require auto insurance . Auto insurance is regulated at the state level . With the exception of the state of New Hampshire , every state has at least a state minimum liability coverage requirement . Some states also require medical coverage -LRB- aka PIP -RRB- , and some states require uninsured motorist coverage as well .
Life insurance is regulated by state insurance departments . These agencies license or certify companies to sell life insurance in their state . And they do so according to their own standards . This means that not every company can sell their products in every state . It also means that not every product from every company would be approved by that state insurance department . Not only that : it means that certain sales procedures , such as the replacement of existing policies , follow different protocols . Your broker must work with his general agent and guide you through these state regulations . There is no federal agency regulating the life insurance industry , and I think that is a good thing . It simply is not needed . Excessive government regulation would only be cumbersome and costly . One reason why federal intervention is not needed is because the industry does a very good job of regulating itself . The National Association of Insurance Commissioners acts to promote industry - wide standards and best practices . The chief insurance regulators from all 50 states , the District of Columbia , and US territories all work together . They coordinate oversight of broker market conduct , consumer protection , and institutional viability . So you have kind of a state-based national system of insurance regulation . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
If you live in one state and are fortunate enough to also own a vacation home in another , and you choose to have a car registered in state for your use while you are there , then it is possible , if not required that you have a car insurance policy in that state . Most if not all states require car insurance in order to register a car for use on public access roads and highways and in most cases , that insurance must be obtained in the state in which the car is registered . Honestly that is the only circumstance I can think of where you may have insurance on a car from another state which is not where you primarily reside .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
The short answer is yes , every driver needs to be insured . Now , this does n't mean that every driver must purchase their own policy . Family members who live in the same household can usually be covered under the same policy . The reason every driver needs to be insured is that every driver has an exposure . Every time you drive a car , there is a chance that something could happen . There could be damage to a car , damage to property , or an injury to you , or to someone else . The only way you can be sure you 're protected is t be covered under an auto insurance policy . Find an agent you can trust . They 'll be able to build an auto insurance policy that protects you from most things that can happen while driving a vehicle .
Life insurance is required as collateral at the lenders request . The SBA does not require life insurance on every loan so check with your lender to determine what the requirements are . The SBA website has a loan checklist you can download . If your lender does require life insurance , you can use an existing policy assuming it meets the collateral requirements laid out by the lender or you can purchase a new policy for the exact amount of coverage required by the lender . The best idea is to check with the lender to see whats required .
Yes , Michigan is a no fault state . As with every no fault state , medical coverage is required . However Michigan goes beyond that , as they are the only state that requires guaranteed unlimited lifetime medical benefits coverage . The auto insurance companies are require to insure the first 500 thousand of an injury claim , a state mandate catastrophe fund -LRB- known as MCCA -RRB- pays beyond that . MCCA fees cost $ 186 per year per vehicle -LRB- and that number seems to go up every year -RRB- . As a result of these factors , Michigan has the highest auto insurance rates in the nation .
Only if you and your significant other are legally married . So , if it is a male/female relationship you are inquiring about then things are pretty straightforward from the marriage standpoint . If it is a same sex relationship you are inquiring about then things get more complicated . Same sex marriage is an issue that is still being addressed on a state by state basis . If your home state does not recognize same sex marriage and your employer is domiciled -LRB- incorporated in , established in -RRB- in such a state then you ca n't get married in that state anyways and an out-of-state marriage in a state that does recognize same sex marriage is not recognized in your home state . There is a tremendous amount of litigation going on in the Federal courts over this issue which makes it hard to be totally definitive when addressing this question . To make things even more interesting , you might work at a branch location of a company domiciled in a state that recognizes same sex marriage while your state of residence still does n't . And your employer 's policy may be to accept same sex spouses as dependents under their group health plan . This can result in the situation where one same sex couple -LRB- you still have to be married but I 've got some neighbors that went out of state to get married in a jurisdiction that does allow for same sex marriage even though our home state currently does not -RRB- may be able to take advantage of their employer 's health coverage while a similar same sex couple across the street who work for employers headquartered in states that do n't recognize same sex marriage ca n't cover their same sex spouse as a dependent . It is an interesting time to be in the employee benefits business .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
Generally speaking , probably not . Most States require you to have at least a mandatory minimum amount of Liability Insurance in order for a car to be registered . Your Car Dealership will need to obtain proof of that coverage from your Isurance Professional in order to register the car for you , so without such proof , they ca n't really do anything to complete the deal . In addition , unless you are paying cash for the car , it will either be financed or leased and in both cases , there are requirements to have both Comprehensive and Collision coverage on the car and , in the case of a lease , the required amount of Liability coverage which is somewhat more than any State 's minimum requirement .
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
Most companies now use an on-line application for auto insurance . During the application process every car at the residence will probably be identified . Every driver living in the household will probably be identified . Every claim made by every driver on every car will be identified and the driving record of each driver will be identified . This information will immediately feed into the quoting process . Some companies might not be as automated and review of driving records may take place after the coverage is bound but that would be unusual and the company would probably cancel the policy as soon as they determine that you dont have a license .
Most states require proof of car insurance in order to register your car for use on public roads and highways . So , if you reside in one state and have a car registered there , then the insurance would have to be issued from that state as well . Check with your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy , but generally , the coverage you have in your policy will protect you across state lines , and into Canada . There may be limitations on travel to Mexico . Now , there may be other factors to consider as well . Here in CT , once one establishes residency , one has 30 days in order to register their car here . In order to register a car here , a CT issued Insurance policy will be required .
The first penalty is that you more than likely would not be able to register your car for use on public roads . Most States require car insurance in order to do that . If you had car insurance but let it lapse , or cancel it , the Insurance Company in many states like Connecticut , will notify the Department of Motor Vechicles -LRB- DMV -RRB- . They will contact you and require you to show proof of coverage . If you can not , they will suspend your registration andit will be illigal to drive your car -LRB- s -RRB- . If you do drive and are stopped by a police officer , along with the charge for which you have been stopped , you will also be found to be driving an unregistered and uninsured car which will add to the size of your fine . In many cases the car will be towed and impounded and you will have to find another means of transportation back home , for which you may have to pay . You may also be required to appear in court . Once that is behind you , in order to get your car back , you will have to show proof that you have bought insurance again . It will be more expensive now because of the violations and the fact that you have not had continuous coverage . You will also have to pay to have the car releassed from the impound facility . You will have lost considerable time from work for all of this meaning that on top of having to shell out more money , you will have lost pay . Bottom line ... do n't drive without insurance .
I am assuming this question relates to whether or not a policyholder can deduct their auto insurance premiums on their Federal or state income taxes . Unless the car is used for business purposes , the answer is `` no '' . However , if you use your car for business purposes , and your employer does not reimburse you for the business use of your car , there is a way to deduct a portion of your auto insurance premium . The IRS allows two ways to deduct expenses for the non-reimbursed use of your personal car . The first method is the mileage method . The IRS sets a mileage allowance every year , and that allowance is meant to cover fuel , wear and tear , maintenance , insurance , and other expenses . The second method is to keep track of all of the expenses related to your car , and then pro-rate those expenses by the amount of business use of your car . My employer reimburses me for the business use of my car using the mileage method . I do n't know if it 's worth the trouble to keep detailed records of your car expenses to make the second method worthwhile .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much Commission Does Health Insurance Agent Make ?
Compensation varies among states , insurers and producers themselves . For example , a broker in New Jersey that sells only Blue Cross plans will not be compensated the same as a broker in Ohio that sells only Anthem Blue Cross and Medical Mutual Of Ohio plans . Also , as of 2014 , when State Exchanges are operational , broker compensation is expected to reduce , although ironically , their expert and unbiased advice and guidance will be needed more than ever .
It varies based on how much volume you sell . 12 % is not uncommon . If an agent sells a lot his % will be more . Some products in the health category pay more than others . long Term Care insurance for instance pays much higher but the cost of obtaining customers is also much higher .
How much does a New York Life agent make ? Well it goes from zero to millions , depending on the agent . New York Life is a commission based company that pays agents for completed transactions in insurance and equity investments . Since the company is based in New York all commission payments are based on the State of New York 's restrictions on commissions . So in many cases this means the New York Life agent makes less upfront on sales than other agents . Commission payments tend to be stretched out over time with the policy .
How much commission does a life insruance agent make ? Commissions vary by type of product sold and by state sold in . There is a wide range of payouts from 0 % -LRB- yes , there are products that do n't pay a commission -RRB- to upwards of 120 % for the first year . After the first year , in many cases no further commission is earned .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
Life insurance agents make money through commissions on the products they sell . If Term insurance , these commissions are usually paid for the first year , then sometimes there is a very small residual commission earned annually after that . If the policy is dropped in the first 6-12 months , commissions are often withdrawn back from the agent . Permanent policies usually have a small recurring commission annually , which is how many life insurance agents are able to supplement Social Security income during retirement .
An auto insurance agent can make MILLIONS of dollars if he can sell MILLIONS of policies covering MILLIONS of automobiles ... . No , actually , like most insurance products ... an agent 's income is based on commission sales . The more policy count an agent can sell , the more commission he/she should be able to make . And now you wonder ... what commission percentage should an agent make ? Well , that depends on the deals you can work out with your companies and/or MGAs . Then , depending on your State laws ... you may or may NOT be able to charge additional fees ... but that is a completely different questions to be answered .
Agents that are hired by an agency may be paid a salary by that agency . Agents that sell independently , or in an agency that pays according to production , get paid commission . The sale of a life insurance policy will pay the agent a commission if the policy is retained for up to a year . Some policies will pay a `` residual '' commission -LRB- much smaller than first year commission -RRB- for each year the insured person keeps the policy .
When a Term policy is sold , the insurance company pays out from 50 % to over 100 % of the first year premium for commissions . With Term insurance , if there are any commissions paid after the first year , they are very small . Permanent insurance pays out a residual commission each year that the policy is in effect . It should be noted that it is not just the agent who gets the commission paid by the carrier . If there is a general agency/brokerage involved -LRB- as there usually is -RRB- , they get a cut . If the agent works for an agency or office , they will probably get a cut . So what the agent earns depends on whether he/she is independent and/or works directly with the carrier , or whether he/she is part of a team that places the policy and shares the commission .
That 's a great question ! An insurance agent most often works off of a payment that is made to them when they sell a policy or product for the company - called a commission . These commissions can be fairly sizable , or very small , depending upon the sale . Therefore , in most cases , the earnings of the insurance agent depend entirely upon their ability to sell , and the product commission that is paid upon the sale . I believe the vast majority of agents will tailor the right product to the needs of the client , but there will unfortunately always be a few that are more interested in commission than client . You are always wise to have an idea of what it is that you want , and if you feel pressured , to ask for time to think it over . Follow your instincts . If you were considering a career as an agent , be aware that the start up period can be really lean until you 've gotten your client base built , and you may need to have another source of income , especially if you were accustomed to a steady paycheck . Once you get rolling , if you are motivated , honest , and good with your clients , you can make a very comfortable living . Anything I can do to help , I 'm happy to - feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Most life insurance policies pay a commission to the agent who sold the policy . The commission is usually a percent of the `` commissionable premium '' . The commissionable part of the premium may or may not exclude policy fees , and with universal life there is a target premium beyond which no commission is paid . The commission is usually paid within a month after the policy is placed , although some companies pay faster than others . If the insured drops the policy during the first year , some or all the commission may be charged back from the agent and returned to the life insurance company .
Life insurance agents are almost always commission salespeople . Agents that work exclusively for one carrier may draw a small base salary , but the industry is designed on a pay-for-performance model . If you ask an agent that same question you 'll find that most treat their practice as a small business regardless of who they sell for . I think you 'll find most of the agents that contribute answers on Insurance Library are independent insurance agents and 100 % commission representatives . In my opinion , that 's a huge advantage for consumers , because the agents interests are aligned with the consumers . Sell the right policy the first time so the consumer keeps it and the agent gets commissioned for it .
I agree with Barry on this one , especially since there is not cost to the consumer to use an agent . You will not pay extra in your insurance premium if you choose to use an agent in the process . All insurance rates are set by the insurance commissioner in each state and can not be changed to include a fee for using an agent . Some agents may choose to charge a fee , instead of taking the insurance commission offered by the insurance company for their services , but they may not take both . So feel free to get some free advice , education and knowledge on these complicated and changing insurance plans . If you do n't you may end up on a plan that does not include your doctor because your Doctor told you he `` takes '' that insurance ... when in reality he only is on one of the insurance companies networks , not all 3 . Use the knowledge of an educated health insurance agent to make an informed decision on your health insurance ... it 's one of the most important decisions you will make to protect your family . I believe the same with Life Insurance . Make sure to glean from an educated life insurance agent before making a `` wrong '' choice . There are so many new options out there that bare further review such a the Indexed Universal Life Insurance plans where you can accumulate cash with a good rate of return and no downside risk of the market . Gaining knowledge is always a good thing ... ask the experts !
The short answer is it depends . There are many factors that goes into a life insurance agents paid commissions . There are different commission rates with different carriers . The main factor is how hard the agent works . If he or she writes a lot of business , then they will make a high 6 figure income and some make 7 figures . If they are not hard working aggressive folks then they will make a low 5 figure income or fail all together . It is a great living for the person with a good work ethic , high morals and character and the willingness to learn constantly .
Life insurance agents in Vermont make a wide range of salaries . As with any other business that pays commission -LRB- and usually , commission only -RRB- , the amount of work put into the career makes a big difference . But it also depends on the economy , how many people you know , whether you have the money to stick with it for a while , etc. . If there is an average , most agents in Vermont probably do not make it , but earn far less or far more than that .
Life insurance brokers are paid a % of the commissionable premium of the life insurance policies they place . Each life insurance carrier and product pays differently , and agents are paid on different schedules set by the general agencies they use . For Term Life insurance , the commission is usually paid only on the first year premium , and if the policy lapses before the year ends , the broker may lose some or all of the commission . For Permanent policies and some Term policies , a small residual commission is paid to agent for years after the first year 's commission is paid . Of course , some agents work for brokers and are simply paid a salary .
It 's going to depend on the type of coverage and the payout offered by the insurance carrier . The state where a policy is sold may also have some restrictions on how much commission is paid out at one time . A commission is paid to an agent `` after '' a premium has been paid and is in good standing from the insurance carrier . Commissions depending on the product can be paid for just one year or several at a lower amount each year , depending on the company .
In my opinion , you 're asking the wrong question . If you contact ten different companies , you 'll get ten different rates for the same coverage . That does n't mean the one with the higher premium is n't as good a program . It might have the best provisions for your particular situation . Besides , every company will tell you that they have the best product . The question you should be asking is `` Do I have an agent who I trust to do the best thing for me and my family ? '' Every situation is different and a good agent will have the resources to find the best combination of programs that fits yours . It may be all whole life or no whole life or some combination of different programs . I would begin by asking questions and finding out how much you need , how long you need it for , and your budget . The program you begin with will , most likely , change as you get older and your circumstances change . Be smart and find a good agent who cares more about your family than he/she does about their next commission check . Then , listen to them , and do what they recommend . You and your family will be much better off .
Not all life insurance agents are paid the same . But as a general rule 100 % of the first year premiums go to commissions . If an agent works for a company that supplies him with an office and advertising , he will usually make 50 % of the first year commission and the company or agency makes the other 50 % to recoup their overhead . If the agent is an independent broker , he will be paid the entire 100 % but must pay all his own business expenses .
That is a great question ! Most insurance agents do not work on a salary , they are paid based upon what they sell . Each type of policy pays a different amount of commission , and different companiescan pay the same agent a different amount for the same policy . The commission is a percentage of whatever your policy would cost for a year . So if the policy costs you $ 1000 for a year , and the agent receives their commission at say , 80 % , then they would receive $ 800 for selling you that policy . There may , or may not be residual money paid to the agent after that , it again depends upon the company , and the policy sold . If you need more detail , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Get Health Insurance If I Have Hepatitis C ?
That is a great question ! Thanks to the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- the insurance companies are no longer allowed to deny coverage to people with `` pre-existing conditions '' . This is a great blessing to folks that would not have been able to get help with their medical needs before . Some insurers and the politicians they support would like to have the act repealed , and unfortunately should that happen , then people would again be denied care . If you go to the WEBSITELINK website during the next open enrollment period , you can choose a plan , and may find that you qualify for help paying for it . Thanks for asking !
Under the Afforable Care Act , you can not be declined for health insurance due to a pre-existing condition or other health-related issue . You have the option to secure a bronze , silver , gold , or platinum level plan - please note , not every carrier offers a plan under each level -LRB- e.g. company XYZ may only offer bronze , silver , and gold plans , but not platinum plans -RRB- . Individuals under age 30 also have the option of securing a catastrophic plan . If you qualify for a subsidy , you would want to look into plans ON the health insurance exchanges . If you do n't qualify for one , you may want to look into plans OFF the exchanges as you will generally have more options available to you . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker if you 're looking for coverage or want to review your existing insurance to see if a better option is available . Insurance brokers have an in-depth knowledge of products from many different carriers and can help you determine the plan that 's going to best serve your needs and your budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
You have two ways to get life insurance with Hepatitis C . One is to go with a simplified issue or guaranteed issue policy , and one is to go with a medically underwritten policy . The simplified issue policy will have a limited number of health questions and will not require an exam . The guaranteed issue policy will have no health questions and not require an exam . Both options are a fairly certain way to get a policy . The face amount will be limited -LRB- possibly a maximum of $ 25,000 or less , but some policies offer more coverage -RRB- . And it may be graded -LRB- pays a reduced benefit for natural death during the first years of the policy -RRB- . If you have cirrhosis of the liver , this is most likely your only option . And some people choose this because it is easy and they do not need a large policy . If you do want over $ 25,000 of coverage , you would pay far less by applying for a medically underwritten policy , if you can qualify for it . If your liver labs are fairly normal and you have had a biopsy and there is no liver damage , this could be a good choice for you . If your labs are normal and you have not had a biopsy , the rates may be higher , but it still is an option . If you have had successful treatment that has shown eradication of the Hep C a year after your treatment ends , you will get the lowest rates . Some genotypes of hepatitis C , or failed treatment , or high lab results , may make it necessary to go the simplified or guaranteed issue route . Hepatitis C is a complicated disease and you should use an insurance agency that specializes in insurance for persons with Hep C to help save you time and money .
Yes , there are life insurance policies that nearly everyone with Hepatitis C can get . The type of policy , and the price , will depend on the medical details . Having normal liver lab values and an undamaged liver as evidenced by biopsy are helpful in getting a medically underwritten policy . There will usually be a small table rating for the best cases , unless there was successful treatment eradicating the virus , then there may be no table rating added . Hepatitis C is very difficult to assess without being a medical professional and without medical records . So completing an application for an `` informal '' offer is a good idea for large cases . For small cases , there are simplified issue policies that most people can get if their Hepatitis C does not fit the criteria to get a policy requiring an exam .
Yes , most people can get life insurance with Hep C . If you want a policy that pays 100 % of the death benefit from day one , or for face amounts over $ 100,000 , there will be some medical requirements . The Hepatitis C must be stable and liver labs close to the normal range . Those who have never had a liver biopsy will pay higher rates , although if you have had a liver biopsy it can not show cirrhosis . If you have had Hep C treatment that was still successful at least a year after the last treatment , rates will be best . If treatment was recommended and proved unsuccessful , or if liver labs are high , or other signs that the Hep C is not under control , then there are simplified or guaranteed issued policies available to nearly everyone who has Hepatitis C . What you can get will depend on your age and the products offered in your state . Contact an agency with experience in writing life insurance for people with Hep C to find your best rate .
Original Medicare does not cover routine Hepatitis C screening , but it can cover screening if approved by Medicare due to signs or symptoms of Hepatitis C being present . In that case , the screening becomes diagnostic and can be covered by Medicare guidelines . Under Medicare Advantage PPO plans , routine Hepatitis C screening IS covered .
Hepatitis C is not tested for on a life insurance exam , per se . However , the blood test used for life insurance exams does test liver function by measuring liver enzymes . A high value for AST , SGOT , ALT , and/or GGT could cause the underwriter to question the presence of hepatitis C. Medical records may need to be ordered , or you might be required to have further testing before being able to obtain a medically underwritten policy . If you go into the application process knowing you have hepatitis C , be sure to tell your agent so they can find you a policy for which you qualify at the best possible price .
Yes , most people can get life insurance with Hep C . If applying for a medically underwritten policy , the underwriter will look at your liver labs , whether you hepatitis C is stable , how long you have had it , results of your liver biopsy -LRB- if one was done -RRB- , the type of Hep C you have , whether you had treatment -LRB- if so , was is successful -RRB- , whether you drink alcohol , and your overall health . If applying for a No Exam policy , there are fewer questions and these are easier to get . Every policy has a different set of questions , and some have no health questions at all . Contact a specialist in Hep C to purchase your life insurance policy so that you get placed with a company with whom you can qualify , and secure the lowest price .
The rating you get when applying for life insurance while having Hepatitis B or Hepatitis C depends on a number of factors . Have you had a liver biopsy ? If so , did it show fibrosis or cirrhosis ? Did you try treatment ? If so , was it successful ? What are your liver lab values ? These and other questions make a big difference in whether you can get q medically underwritten policy , and what you will be rated . If you are unable to get a medically underwritten policy , there are a number of No Exam policies that cover Hep C. Find an agency that specializes in impaired risk to help you sort through the choices and find one that works for you .
Most people with Hep C can get life insurance . If you have normal liver function lab results and have had a biopsy that shows no liver damage , you will have the lowest rates . If you have cirrhosis or fibrosis , have abnormal liver labs , and/or have a history of failed treatment , you may need to use a simplified or guaranteed issue policy . Regardless , there is usually life insurance out there for those with Hepatitis C if you know where to look . Contact an agency that specializes in life insurance for people with Hep C to get your best rate .
Life insurance companies test liver labs that can indicate Hep C . They do not diagnose Hepatitis C , per se . Instead , they will decline or postpone if Hep C is suspected , and ask that you see your doctor before reapplying or continuing with your application . Keep in mind that the above only applies to policies that require an exam . No Exam policies do not test blood although they usually ask on the life insurance application if Hep C is present .
There are a large number of refugees who have entered our country in the last few years who have Hepatitis C . Some have had this disease for thirty or more years . I have seen some of these people have standard rate life insurance policies issued . For many the Hep C is just a low level irritant with little or no effect on longevity .
Medicare Part D will pay for some Hepatitis C medications and treatments such as Rebetol , Ribapak , ribavirin , interferon alfacon-1 , and pegineterferon alfa-2b . However , there is a complicated grid of `` if this , then that '' one must adhere to in order have the drug or treatment covered . Call your Medigap or Medicare Advantage agent to find out if you qualify for Hep C treatment through Medicare .
Of course it is safe to go without health insurance , just like it is safe to drive without a spare tire until you have a flat . Then it becomes a problem . If you are a multi-millionaire and can pay for whatever foreseeable accident or illness that might befall you then you probably do n't `` need '' health insurance . If you are like most Americans then you might not have a pile of money stashed away for an unexpected illness or injury and that is why you have health insurance . This is the kind of bad judgment call that can seriously mess up your financial life and perhaps life in general . Just taking a good fall from your bicycle and needing some orthopedic surgery can cost tens of thousands of dollars -LRB- I recently had a friend have such an experience -RRB- , a normal child birth will probably put you back $ 7000 to $ 10,000 , and would you like that new cure for Hepatitis C ? A bargain at over $ 80,000 for that round of treatment . You may say , I 'll just go to the emergency room at our local public hospital and they 'll treat me and then write it off . Do n't count on it , those days are pretty much over unless you are really , truly poor -LRB- in which case you should be enrolled in Medicaid -RRB- . But with the financial losses and reductions in reimbursement levels that hospitals are contending with these days I can assure you that they will turn you over to collections in an effort to get the money you owe them .
Being rated for life insurance means that you had a table rating tacked onto your premium . Table ratings come in letters or numbers , with A to H , or 1 to 8 , being as high as they usually go , although it is possible to be rated up to table L or 12 with some medically underwritten companies and policies . Most commonly , each table rating will add 25 % to the Standard premium . Again , some companies use a different guideline for table ratings , and those differences can make a big difference in the price , with the savings -LRB- or extra cost -RRB- compounding as the table ratings get higher . Table ratings are just an assessment of risk and mortality , as are all health ratings given by life insurance underwriters . If approvals ended at Standard , many people would not be able to qualify for life insurance . Being able to get a rated policy enables many persons with MS , type 1 diabetes , Hepatitis C , and other health conditions to get a traditional life insurance policy of any type or amount . PS I just saw that there is additional information to this question . If your blood pressure or A1C run high , or if you have had complications from your diabetes or hypertension , it will not matter if you are only taking two pills per day . If , however , you have a history of good control with both , you may need to look at a different company to see if you can get a better rating .
That is a great question ! Hepatitis C will not prevent someone from being able to find a life insurance policy . While it may keep them from getting the cheapest , highest benefit policies , there are certainly enough policies out there with adequate coverage that will be available . I would advise that you contact an independent agent who can help you find the best policy for you . Thanks for asking !
Yes , you can get life insurance if you have hepatitis c . There will be additional information needed from you and your doctor regarding when diagnosed , condition of the liver . You can expect to have to pay a higher premium at minimum . You may also be declined so your best bet is to work with an agent who has a relationship with insurance companies that will take impaired cases .
Yes you can ; however , the cost of insurance will be higher than if you did not have Hepatitis C. Most `` guaranteed issue '' life insurance policies would allow for this disease without the requirement of a health exam . The application consists of medical and prescription questions , but no fluid samples are required . Guaranteed issue policies are more expensive because they are designed for people with illnesses to have access to life insurance coverage .
You can purchase health insurance with Hepatitis C as a preexisting medical condition . There would be no waiting period before benefits begin , but time is quickly running out . The Affordable Care Act requires that health plans accept all applicants regardless of existing medical conditions . Applicants need to enroll in a plan during the annual open enrollment period through their state insurance exchange . The first open enrollment ends on March 31 of 2014 - in just a few days . Coverage would begin April 1 . If you miss this open enrollment window you could enroll in plans with a January 1 , 2015 effective date .
Most people with Hepatitis C can get life insurance . If there is no liver damage and labs are normal , they might possibly even be rated Standard or a low table rating . If there is a history of failed treatment , liver labs are abnormal , liver biopsy showed cirrhosis or fibrosis , or some other considerations , the applicant may need to use a simplified issue or guaranteed issue policy .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Why Are Womens Car Insurance Cheaper ?
Insurance companies analyze the data on millions of automobile claims . In that process they identify significant differences in experience . If women are charged less in your state than men , you can be assured that insurance companies can detect a difference between the two and that they have convinced the insurance commissioner that this is in the best interest of the drivers in that state . California doesnt discriminate based upon sex .
This is a rather ambiguous question because I am wondering as compared to whom ? I will assume that you mean as compared to a male of similar race and gender . Briefly , please do not take this answer as being racist or sexist , but premiums are based upon loss ratios , which are the results of actuarial studies based upon region , gender , race , age , and a million other details . Typically , women pay a slightly higher premium just because statistically more women make claims then men . Now this might be because more women are driving -LRB- i.e. more numerous claims -RRB- or because men drive more aggressively -LRB- i.e. causing more accidents -RRB- . Now , with this being said , women can shop around to obtain a cheaper premium . Moreover , women can take defensive driving courses and carry more liability insurance to obtain discounts at a later date . If a woman maximizes her discounts then her premium will be negligibly higher than a male of the same age and race . Sorry for the unfair answer .
Life insurance is cheaper for women because statistics over time have proven women as a group tend to live longer than males as a group . Pricing is lower because `` risk '' is spread out over a longer period of time . In a reverse , women cost more for health insurance -LRB- where it 's allowed -RRB- because they are bigger users of healthcare than men . Maybe the reason women live longer .
Life insurance is cheaper for women if comparing the same rating class of each sex . The older the person is , and the longer the guaranteed coverage period lasts , the bigger the price discrepancy . That is because men die at a younger age than women , on average . If the woman has a health condition , or is overweight or underweight , smokes , or has some other risk factor to bump her into a higher rate class than a man of the same age , her rate can be higher than his . Just being a woman does not automatically mean she will pay a cheaper price than a man .
There are a lot of factors that go into the price of life insurance . Every year that you get older , the price increases for insurance . It also depends on how much life insurance you are looking for . The higher the death benefit , the higher the monthly premium . Another factor to consider is your health . Life insurance is based on the insurance companys risk . If you are unhealthy or have a few high risk health conditions , you will have to pay a higher rate for insurance . It is also up to the insurance company . Some insurance companies charge more for the exact same coverage . Also , women have a longer life expectancy then men so the rates for women are usually lower . There are two types of life insurance too . Term insurance only covers you for a period of time and whole life covers you for a lifetime and you are guaranteed a payout . Term is usually cheaper because if you dont pass in the specified term , the insurance company does not pay out anything . For policies that have a large death benefit , the insurance company usually asks for an exam to be done that checks your blood , heart rate , and other key health related factors . The rate is usually higher for smokers compared to non-smokers . Life insurance rates are determined on a case by case basis .
That is an interesting question . I 've been an agent for many years , and I can speak from experience when I tell you that price is not based on color . I do not work with any companies -LRB- and I work with many -RRB- that would even consider breaking the law that way . That said , there are some things that come into play that might make you think -LRB- wrongly , I promise you -RRB- that It may cost more for African Americans . Life insurance costs are based in great part upon risk factors , including high blood pressure , diabetes , and obesity . These factors , along with heart disease are statistically common among all Americans , but much more so among African Americans . The American Heart Association in an article released last September suggests that a gene found in African Americans may be the cause for the highest rates of hypertension in the world . This disease is the leading cause of heart disease -LRB- # 1 killer of Americans -RRB- and strokes -LRB- # 4 killer -RRB- . Their article also outlines problems with obesity -LRB- 63 % of men , 77 % of women over 20 years old -RRB- among the community , as well as higher rates of diabetes -LRB- 2x as likely as whites to have it , among those 20 and older 15 % have the disease -RRB- . The US Dept. of Health and Human Services Office of Minority Health documents higher rates of cancers among the African American community in 2009 research , as well as higher mortality rates . Insurance companies are n't as concerned about the causes and reasons behind the statistics , as much as the heath issues of the applicants . If you are of any race , your rate will be higher if you suffer from diabetes or hypertension , especially if it has gone uncontrolled . The life expectancy of anyone with those issues is shortened , and so the companies bear more risk , and as a result charge more . The better the health , the cheaper the rates might be a simple way to put it , since the risk to the company determines the rate they will charge to insure you . If you smoke , expect to pay more . If you are overweight , expect to pay more . This will be true regardless of race , where you live , or the amount of coverage you apply for . I hope that this helps you understand how the industry works , and why it might seem like it is unfair . Thanks for asking !
Car insurance rates are rarely a moral issue . If guys have worse driving records than young women , the company can ask many states to allow them to rate them separately . In California , that isnt an option . There are only a few rating factors in California and sex isnt one of them . That doesnt make insurance cheaper , it merely means that there isnt a distinction between male and female drivers in California .
Regardless of what type of insurance , if you 're asking why it 's priced the way it is , the answer is always this : it 's based on the actuarial data . Why is life insurance less expensive for women ? Because the data shows they live longer than men . Why is short term insurance less expensive ? Actually , I do n't know the specific actuarial data , but my guess is that the likelihood of your using insurance within 6 months is far less than if you had the insurance for many years .
I think there is an image out there of single people as being carefree , unencumbered , no responsibilities . So no need for life insurance . However , I have come across so many single people that are just the opposite , that it makes you think : sure , a whole lot of single people really do need life insurance . Lets suppose you are a single person who is 22 years old . Youve got a girlfriend , or a boyfriend , or both -LRB- yep - sign of the times . -RRB- Just finishing up school , thinking about getting a job . You know at some point youll be married , or at least living with somebody , paying bills , forming some kind a codependent relationship . Maybe you will buy life insurance then . Why wait ? You know that pricing is based on age . Why wait four years when the price will be that much higher ? Buy it now . Lock in at the lowest rate available . Be smart . Now lets suppose youve got a bunch of college debt to carry around with you . Some credit card charges too . God forbid a drunk driver should nail you tomorrow night . Why would you want to saddle your family with these bills ? If your parents have cosigned the loan , or if you have a joint account , they are certainly exposed . Even if they havent , get them out of the line of fire of a greedy creditor . Pick up some cheap life insurance to protect them . Its the least you could do . Another point : do you know how many single men and women out there are successful ? Are making hefty incomes ? Are thriving entrepreneurs ? Tons . Many people postpone marriage and family to get their little empire launched . Along the way , they pick up bank debt . They have businesses to secure . They set up charitable foundations . They set up a whole network of financial interests , and they are at the center of that network . Where they to unfortunately disappear , the entire network would unravel . So they buy life insurance to secure their interests . As would any responsible mover and shaker .
That is a great question ! There is a reason why cheaper things are cheaper . In the case of life insurance , term policies are much cheaper than whole life policies are . The reason ? Term policies have zero frills . They rarely have to pay out , as the terms usually expire before you do ; and they have nothing extra in the payment but insurance costs , so there is no accumulating cash value either . Term policies can be a good option in some cases , please be sure that you speak with an agent to make sure that it is right for your needs . Thanks for asking !
Insurance is sharing risk . If you drive a Corvette and I drive a Honda Fit , would you think that it was fair for both to be charged the same premium ? The same is true for any segmentation that takes place . You dont think that it is fair for women to be charged more than men for health insurance . Insurance company records show that it costs more to treat women than men , so like the Corvette , their premium should be higher . In todays environment health coverage is becoming an entitlement . The dialog shifts from demonstrating meaningful segments to politically defined segments . Insurance companies are told what factors they can use to base their rates . Perhaps in the near future women and men will pay the same premiums .
Yes , you can be declined for a medical condition and/or adverse health history as it pertains to `` morbidity '' . Morbidity involves a reduced ability to perform mental or physical activities . Such ailments as arthritis , cognitive impairment , Alzheimer 's disease , advanced osteoporosis , lung malfunction , and blindness are all classified under morbidity . If one uses tobacco and has any morbidity issue , that usually results in a decline as well , but smoking by itself does not often result in a decline.Underwriting for long-term care insurance is getting tighter . Genworth , for instance , will soon be requiring some medical work for applicants , which may include lab tests -LRB- urine sample and blood draw -RRB- . Carriers are also moving toward gender-based premiums , with male applicant costs being lower than female applicant costs due to the fact that more women go on claim than men . This is also true for most insurance , so it 's not a new concept . Life insurance costs are higher for men than women because women live longer . Disability Insurance has had gender-based rates for quite a while . Only Montana has mandatory uni-sex rates for all insurance.Before submitting a formal application for long-term care , an applicant should be pre-screened by completing a medical questionnaire provided either by the carrier or the representing agent . Applicants should answer all answers truthfully and completely to determine medical eligibility . It is better to be told not to submit an application due to confidential prescreening than have a formal application declined .
Car insurance can go up for women just like they can go up for men . There is no difference really other then women in general get a slightly lower rate if all things remain equal . Other then that the basic same rules apply when it comes to age , area , type of vehicle and surcharges .
Why is disability insurance more expensive for females ? Honestly , I have n't found that to be the case . Reasons could be women tend to use medical services more than men which can mean `` living '' insurance products like health and disability could be priced higher than men , who pay more for their life coverage .
I am not aware of the term joint car policy . However , if you mean , Is it cheaper to have two cars on the same policy or with the same company ? the answer is generally , yes . Most car insurers offer a multi-car discount . If you are really asking if it is cheaper to have an auto policy with two insureds , technically , it doesnt make any difference . In California auto policies are issued to households and all the drivers in the household are considered .
I agree with Jeff , Mark and Jerry 's answers , but I would like to add a bit more . Life insurance also will not pay a benefit if the death occurred in a commission of a crime and in some cases any act of war , such as militaryservice This is why the military provides its own coverage for our servicemen and women . I have seen some policies that also wo n't pay if the death was the result of an insurrection or riot . Basically , if you tell the truth on the application , you are not a current member of the armed forces serving in a war zone , and you are not a criminal , you should be okay !
Some factors that determine how much life insurance will cost are : 1 -RRB- Age -LRB- generally , the older you are , the higher the premium will be for a policy of the same type as a younger person of similar health -RRB- ; 2 -RRB- gender -LRB- men usually pay more than women -RRB- ; 3 -RRB- health -LRB- both current and past health -RRB- ; 4 -RRB- tobacco use -LRB- users of tobacco usually pay more -RRB- ; and 5 -RRB- type of policy -LRB- the shorter the premium is locked in , the lower the premium usually is -RRB- . There are other factors that can also enter in such as treatment for substance abuse , numerous traffic violations , felony , dangerous hobbies , and being on disability . That is why shopping among multiple companies can help you save money , as some companies rate certain risk factors more favorably than others .
There is a rule of thumb that men should spend approx 1-3 % of their income on Disability Insurance . The percent is slightly higher for women because women , on average , use disability insurance benefits more often . However , if you are middle aged or older , or have a health condition or high risk job , your rates could be considerably higher .
Disability insurance is a morbidity product . Actuarial morbidity predicts the incidences of injuries and sickness based on age and gender . Women statistically have more injuries and sicknesses that lead to a disability than their male counterparts . So women pay more in premiums for disability insurance than men .
Women who are currently pregnant can not qualify for individual major medical coverage . Likewise , their spouse -LRB- or expectant father -RRB- can not qualify for individual major medical coverage . An exception is women who qualify for an employer group health insurance plan . Group health insurance plans are not allowed to consider pregnancy a pre-existing condition .
end question
start question
annuities
How Are Annuities Invested ?
There are basically three crediting methods used in deferred annuities : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
In Canada , deferred annuities are considered to be insurance policies . Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIAs -RRB- are similar to Guaranted Investment Certificates -LRB- GICs -RRB- the interest and principle in both are guaranteed . An example of the Guaranteed Investment Annuity 's `` insurance element '' is the annuity or monthly income . Guaranteed Investment Funds -LRB- GIFs -RRB- , are segregated funds and are similiar to mutual funds.The funds invested in both are at risk . However , Guaranteed Investment Funds , in addition to the annuity or income element offer maturity and death guarantees of 75 % to 100 % . These investment vehicles offer benefits that could prove to be valuable . For more information please visit JPW.ca or contact me via this web site .
What are annuities ? Well as simply as possible , Annuities are investment products offered through insurance companies . There are different kinds of annuities , some for building balances and others for spending balances of money . The building balances form of annuity is invested and grows tax deferred over time . This is known as the accumulation phase . Depending on your choice of accumulation annuity you can have little risk to significant risk on return . Reducing your investment risk usually also means reducing your investment return . Accumulation annuities can offer a larger range of risk and return options along with tax deferral . When you decide to spend or distribute savings through an annuity , it is called an immediate annuity and begins a systematic series of regular payouts over your lifetime . An immediate annuity is know as a product that you `` ca n't outlive '' as it will pay you as long as you live . And , depending on the payout you choose , can guarantee that if you pass early , the payouts will continue to a beneficiary of your choosing for a set number of years or until all of your contributed funds are spent . An immediate annuity now offers a variety of payout options and really should be considered as part of a retirement portfolio . They provide a constant steady stream of income that will last as long as you do and if you choose an option will keep pace with inflation over time .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
That is a great question ! They can be , a great investment , depending upon your financial situation . An agent will do what is called a `` suitability study '' with you to determine whether an annuity is right for you . The suitability study is designed to see if the investment in an annuity is a safe investment for you to make - is it financially safe , will it meet your retirement needs , and does it fall within the tolerable amount of risk that you are comfortable with . Annuities are not very flexible for a period of time when it comes to the money that you invest . There are large fees and penalties , and much damage done to the earnings potential if you need to take back money from your annuity in the first years of the contract . This period is called the `` surrender period '' , and may last as long as 10 years . That makes an annuity something that should be seriously considered only if you have some safeguards in place , and have a good cash flow . That said , if it is a suitable investment , then it can be a terrific one to make . Annuities can guarantee an income that you ca n't outlive , and with our increasing lifespans that is a great thing to have ! There are some really good annuity products out there , and the indexed ones have some great earning potential and guarantees . If there are specific questions that you have , feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
There are two basic types of annuities , immediate and deferred . Deferred annuities are used as money accumulation vehicles , since they are issued by insurance companies they have features and guarantees other investments can not match . These are of particular interest to self - employed -LRB- any age -RRB- , OR those within 10 to 15 years of retirement or already retired . Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIAs -RRB- are similar to Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GICs -RRB- more information is available at www.GuaranteedInterest.ca In Canada , variable annuities are called segregated funds or seg funds they are similar to mutual funds . More information available at www.ProtectandGrow.ca Immediate annuities provide a guaranteed income stream in exchange for a lump sum premium . They are used as part of a retirement income strategy to provide stability.They are often used to build a guaranteed income to cover fixed expenses . If have assets that are generating interest income and you do not need access to all the capital during your lifetime , the `` insured annuity strategy '' is worth exploring . The objective is to increase your current after tax income while preserving your asset for your heirs . Not for everyone , but the results can be quite dramatic , so it is worth a look . Annuities can also be used to assist in a number of personal and corporate planning strategies , too numerous and complex to be cover here . In Canada , if you are over 65 , income from Interest from a prescribed non-registered annuity qualifies for the $ 2,000 pension tax credit . Note : Interest from a Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- also qualifies . GIAs are like Guaranteed Investment Certificates -LRB- GICs -RRB- but the are issued by insurance companies . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There 's a big difference between the two . A mutual fund is an investment vehicle operated by an investment company which pools the assets of many individuals . The money raised is then invested in accordance with pre-defined goals . Money market funds : These funds invest in a variety of short term , money market debt such as Treasure bills or commercial paper . Growth funds : have an emphasis on long-term capital growth , usually through investment in common stock . Income funds : Focus on providing high , current income , using bonds and other income producing securities . Balanced funds : strive to provide income and long-term capital gain . Both stocks and bonds are used . Keep in mind that mutual funds have risk and you can lose money.Non-qualified tax deferred annuities have basically three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money .
A mutual fund is an investment vehicle operated by an investment company which pools the assets of many individuals . The money raised is then invested in accordance with pre-defined goals . Money market funds : These funds invest in a variety of short term , money market debt such as Treasure bills or commercial paper . Growth funds : have an emphasis on long-term capital growth , usually through investment in common stock . Income funds : Focus on providing high , current income , using bonds and other income producing securities . Balanced funds : strive to provide income and long-term capital gain . Both stocks and bonds are used . Keep in mind that mutual funds have risk and you can lose money . Non-qualified tax deferred annuities have basically three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money .
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement vehicle that allows the owner to choose from an offered selection of investments . When annuitized , it pays out a stream of income to the annuitant . The investments you choose for your variable annuity can increase or decrease in value and that means the overall value and your payout will follow . While a variable annuity can offer a nice upside , there is risk and if the investments inside the annuity decline in value , your payout will be decreased . A variable life insurance policy is a form of permanent life insurance offering a death benefit to your beneficiaries upon your passing . A portion of the premium you pay for a variable life insurance policy goes toward the insurance , a portion toward various investments that the owner of the policy chooses and a portion goes to cover associated fees related to the management of the investments . The variable life insurance policy owner will be given options for the investments , generally mutual funds . As the value of those mutual funds go up and down , the cash value inside your policy follows . There are many options to variable annuities and variable life insurance products that should be considered before purchasing .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
Where are annuities invested ? Well the way to find out is review the insurance company that you bought from financials . There you can get an idea of where they invest to support the annuities they sell . Usually annuities will be invested in safe investments because they have a guaranteed return . The advantage insurance companies possess is the size of the investment . When investing millions to billions they can get a better interest rate on their money compared to someone wanting to invest a few thousand .
David 's article is well written and the basic principles are the same in Canada , the design and tax regulations and advantages are of course very different . Accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- - your money invested is guaranteed Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIF -RRB- also referred to as segregated funds or variable annuities - your money is invested in equities and is not guaranteed . Since the products are issued under the insurance act they include maturity and death benefit guarantees , typically 75 % or 100 % . Payout annuities : You exchange a lump sum of money for a stream of payments for the rest of your life or for a specified number of years . Since they provide a guaranteed pension income they are often used by retirement income planners to cover fixed expenses . The guarantees , estate planning applications , potential creditor proofing and tax advantages are reasons why annuities are an important part of retirement planning . In Canada as in the USA , whether or not an annuity is right for you depends on your individual circumstances . Using an annuity strategy is not always complicated , it is however , often permanent . In most provinces in Canada , almost anyone can call themselves a Financial Adviser or Financial Planner . Look for an insurance broker with a professional designation like a Chartered Life Underwriter -LRB- CLU -RRB- or Certified Financial Planner -LRB- CFP -RRB- . Annuities are often used in combination to increase after tax income , guarantee income , address volatility , `` lock in '' gains , leave a legacy , ensure privacy and provide potential creditor protection . With their increased risk exposure protecting your retirement nest egg is of special importance if you are the self employed . You can find 16 `` I want to ... how do I '' examples at www.jpw.ca If you have further questions please contact me .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
In Canada , immediate and deferred annuities are , with one exception , taxed on an accrual basis . The growth or income is taxed as earned , not as received . How the income is taxed , depends , if it is interest income or , in the case of Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIFs -RRB- , interest , dividends or capital gains . Prescribed Annuities enjoy special taxation -LRB- Section 304 of Income Tax Act -RRB- . They are taxed on a straight line basis rather than on an accrual basis . If you qualify for a prescribed annuity then total amount of `` expected '' interest is averaged based on the number of payments . For example invest in a prescribed life income annuity and your `` life expectancy '' is 22 years . The amount of investment DIVIDED BY `` life expectancy '' EQUALS return of your principle and it is not taxed . The annuity payment SUBTRACT the return of your principle is taxable . The tax savings can be substantial , which is why prescribed annuities are often used to increase after tax income . Especially for those who prefer guaranteed interest income . A life insurance policy can replace the capital for your estate . Depending on the the individual circumstances , increases of after tax income can be 50 % or more . Implementing a strategy involving payout annuities is sometimes complicated , it is however , always permanent . Search for Retirement / Financial planner in your area . Then look for an experienced life insurance broker with a professional designation such as a CLU or CFP . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please contact me .
What are the differences between fixed and variable annuities ? Well , the biggest difference would be the investment pool you work from . A fixed annuity investment choices are made by the insurance company and you receive a stated % return for that year . You do n't have to do anything . A variable annuity shifts the investment risk onto the individual and they , not the insurance company -LRB- to a degree -RRB- decide what the annuity will be invested in . The Risk shifts to the insured and while the possibility exists to outgain the fixed annuity , the possibility of loss , even loss of existing balance exists . A variable annuity REQUIRES attention to a much great degree than a fixed .
Fixed annuities invest your premium into conservative , long term securities -LRB- usually bonds -RRB- chosen by the company . These steady investments allow the company to guarantee you fixed payments later on . Your payments are also guaranteed to last a number of years or a lifetime , determined in advance . Variable annuities are invested in stocks and more risky investments which the annuity holders choose themselves . They may have some guaranteed elements , but also have the potential to pay more than a fixed annuity , or less than a fixed annuity , due to that element of risk .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is The Monthly Cost For Medicare Part D ?
Since Medicare Part D plan are sold by different companies and in different options , the prices vary . You can anticipate a cost of approx $ 25 to $ 100/month in my area , depending on the bells and whistles of the plan . This can be higher or lower based on where you live .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
Most eligible retirees do not pay a premium for Medicare Part A . Once you have accumulated 40 Social Security credits -LRB- that means you have paid Social Security employment taxes for 40 or more quarters -RRB- you do not have to pay a Medicare Part A premium . Most eligible retirees pay a monthly premium of $ 104.90 for Medicare Part B for 2014 . This premium is however more for higher income individuals/couples . A premium chart is available on Medicare.gov . A typical stand alone Medicare Part D prescription drug plan will cost around $ 30 per month . Each of these parts of Medicare -LRB- A , B , and D -RRB- have deductibles and co-payments/co-insurance ; all details are available on Medicare.gov . Retirees often purchase a Medicare supplement insurance policy for an additional premium to provide coverage for Medicare Part A and B deductibles and co-insurance , or enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- Part C -RRB- to package and control costs of Medicare coverage . The average annual out of pocket cost per Medicare beneficiary per the most recent data is $ 4,600 per year . Any individual 's `` cost '' of Medicare will ultimately vary based upon their unique attributes and circumstances ; but to understand the variables and get some control over costs it isadvisableto meet with alicensed insurance agent/advisor who specializes in the senior/Medicare market .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
According to Social Security , you are automatically enrolled in Medicare after receiving disability benefits for two years . The two parts of Medicare coverage you are enrolled in are the hospital insurance and medical insurance . Hospital insurance -LRB- Part A -RRB- is established to help pay for your inpatient hospital bills and some of your follow-up care . The taxes you paid while working helped pay for Part A coverage , so it 's no cost to you . Medical insurance -LRB- Part B -RRB- is provided to help pay your doctors ' bills , outpatient hospital care , and some other medical services . If you choose to enroll in Part B , this coverage comes with a monthly premium . Some other parts of Medicare include : Medicare Advantage -LRB- Part C -RRB- Prescription Drug Coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- Part C plans are made available in many areas across the country . Part C allows you to receive all of your health care services through medical plans offered by Medicare approved private companies . Once you are on Medicare , you also have access to Part D or Prescription Drug Coverage . This type of coverage helps pay for your doctor prescribed medication . If you are a Medicare Beneficiary with low-income , you may be able to get assistance through your state for the payment of your Medicare premiums . To see if you qualify for assistance , it is best to contact your state or local Medicaid agency or welfare office .
That is a great question ! Thanks to the Affordable care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- , there are now exchanges where you can look at several policies to compare them . Even so , they can still be confusing . How do you know what to look for ? I 'd ask you to contact one of the advisers available on the site , or a qualified agent to help find the right policy for you , but here are some simple things that you can look at to get an idea . -LRB- I have simplified this greatly -RRB- The OUT OF POCKET COST - this is what it will cost you to get your service , Doctor visit , or service . The out of pocket is determined by your DEDUCTIBLE -LRB- the amount that you pay before the insurance company pays - a high deductible plan will cost less in monthly premiums , but more when you need medical help -RRB- , your CO-PAY , -LRB- the amount that is charged to you for the service rendered . Typically , the lower your out of pocket , the higher your monthly premium will be . If you/your family are healthy people with few prescriptions or medical needs , a high deductible plan with a low monthly cost might make sense . The PREMIUM - this is the monthly cost of the policy that you will pay to the insurance company for the coverage the policy will provide . The COVERAGE - what the policy will allow for services , Doctors , and prescriptions . Here 's where an adviser can be really helpful . You want the policy that covers the most things for the least cost , while allowing you the most freedom over who to use as the provider of the services . If you have a medical need that requires frequent services , and you 've had the same Doctors for awhile , you 'd want to be sure that the policy allows that doctor to continue being your Doctor -LRB- They call this in-network , or out-of-network and charge accordingly -RRB- , and that his/her office accepts that insurance . This is a greatly simplified overview , and I would still advise that you have someone help you when you are choosing , but this hopefully gives you a better idea of how to get started . Thanks for asking !
If youdefinehaving insurance coverage for your prescription drugs when you are age 65 + as `` good '' when prior to the Bush administration 's implementation of this plan seniors on traditional Medicare did n't , then Medicare Part D is definitely a good thing . In fact , some would argue that Medicare Part D , with its pesky reliance on private insurance options and marketplace competition , is the only part of Medicare that has delivered on it 's promises of expanding coverage for a high utilization population segment and managed to come in under initial cost projections . Medicare Part D is just another level of Medicare coverage specifically designed to address prescription drug coverage . As with Medicare supplement plans , different insurance carriers offer Medicare Part D plans with different levels of coverage and price points for consumers to select from during their initial eligibility period and subsequent open enrollment renewal years . This means that the consumer is obliged to shop around because not all Medicare Part D plans are created equal , far from it . Most consumers would be well served to use the services of an insurance broker who is knowledgeable in the various Medicare Part D plans available in their marketplace .
Plan F is your `` cadillac '' plan -LRB- so-to-speak -RRB- because it provides the most comprehensive coverage and is the most popular Medicare supplement plan . Like other Medicare supplement plans , it covers basic benefits for medical and hospital expenses this plan will pay the remaining portion of whatever Medicare does not pay for medical and hospital charges as long as the charge is approved by Medicare . Ideally , this plan will benefit people who want to have the peace of mind in knowing that all of their Medicare approved charges will be covered - in short , you 're writing the check for your monthly premium and you 're done . You can add a Part D plan to provide coverage for prescriptions . Medicare Supplement Plan F covered benefits include : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
Medicare can be very cost effective . Original Medicare is made up of Part A and Part B. Part A is your hospital insurance which is premium-free for most individuals . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - can be higher for persons with incomes in higher brackets -RRB- . Original Medicare will pay for about 80 % of your healthcare expenses after your deductibles -LRB- $ 1,216 for Part A in 2014 - $ 147 for Part B in 2014 -RRB- . If you want coverage to pay for a portion or all of the other 20 % , you can also purchase a Medigap plan -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plan -RRB- . The main benefit of a Medigap plan is that it helps you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure . If you 'd like prescription coverage too , you can look at adding a Part D plan . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Unfortunately no , you can not simply buy into Medicare . To secure Medicare benefits , you must meet certain eligibility requirements . The most common way people qualify for Medicare is by turning 65 years old . Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- is premium-free for most individuals -LRB- if you did not secure 40 credits , you would be subject to a monthly premium up to $ 426 per month -RRB- . Medicare Part B -LRB- medical insurance -RRB- requires a monthly premium -LRB- starting point is $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - can be higher for higher-income individuals -RRB- . The other way people qualify is if they 're under 65 and are receiving social security disability benefits -LRB- must have been receiving SS disability benefits for 24 continuous months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease . Once you have Part A & Part B established , many people look into adding a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan if they want to have prescription drug coverage .
Medicare Benefits are started automatically the first day of the month you turn 65 if you are already getting benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . Youll get your red , white and blue Medicare card in the mail 3 months before your 65th birthday . If youre not getting Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board and youre close to 65 , youll need to sign up . You can contact Social Security 3 months before you turn 65 , the month of your 65 birthday and 3 months after the month you turn 65 . Generally you wont pay a premium for Part A ; Part B will be deducted out of your Social Security Benefits and is based on your income . If you are still covered by your employers insurance you can decline your Part B coverage and save yourself that cost and apply later when your employer coverage ends . Once you have Medicare there are 2 main ways to get your Medicare coverage , there is Original Medicare or Medicare Advantage Plans . To keep thing simple if you chose Original Medicare you must buy a Part D Prescription Drug Coverage and you may also want to purchase Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . One thing to remember is that all Medigap policys with the same letter are identical in coverage the only difference is the price they charge you so shop around with a broker that represents multiple companies . If you chose Medicare Advantage its very similar to employer insurance where you have to see doctors that accept the insurance and there are small co-pays . Most Advantage plans include Medicare prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- and have low and sometimes no monthly premiums .
For all intents and purposes , the answer is no . There are certain drugs , which must be prescribed , e.g. Cancer treatment drugs , that are covered under Medicare Part B. Drugs covered under Medicare Part B would also be covered under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs however are not covered by traditional Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- or Medigap supplemental insurance . An eligible Medicare beneficiary needs a Part D prescription drug plan in order to obtain drug coverage . You can enroll in a Part D plan at Medicare.gov , subject to certain enrollment period restrictions . As an alternative to a stand alone Part D plan , a beneficiary can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes Part D coverage -LRB- MAPD -RRB- . A beneficiary who enrolls in an MAPD can not have a Medigap policy or a stand alone Part D plan . It 's a good idea to find a licensed insurance agent who specializes in Medicare plans to review your needs and objectives and present you with optimal solutions .
Qualifying for Medicare , in general , is a pretty simple and straight-forward process - the most common way people qualify is by turning age 65 . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov , or at your local social security administration office . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care . You may also want to look into adding a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan as well if you would like to have your coverage for prescriptions as well .
Basically , Medigap is private insurance that supplements original Medicare -LRB- Part A and Part B -RRB- . Original Medicare requires the Medicare beneficiary to pay specified deductibles and coinsurance , and Medigap -LRB- Medicare supplement -RRB- policies are designed to cover some or all of these amounts . Medicare Advantage -LRB- MA -RRB- Plans are private insurance plans that take the place of original Medicare -LRB- Part A and Part B -RRB- , and often include Part D drug coverage as well . MA Plans may or may not require a monthly premium , and specify plan benefits , care requirements and cost sharing which may differ from original Medicare . In order to fully understand differences and obtain a Medicare plan best suited to your needs , it is advisable to meet with a qualified senior market insurance agent/agency with experience in Medicare insurance plans .
MediGap - or Medicare Supplement - insurance varies by plan and by zip code . There are several plans to choose from : A , B , C , D , F , G K , L , M , N - and yes , these letters stand for something different than Medicare A & B , or Part C or D. Which creates some confusion . But Medicare Part A & B basically only pay 80 % of anything - so the options to help cover all or most of the 20 % is either a Medicare Advantage plan or a Medicare Supplement plan - also known as a MediGap plan , and also labeled with letters . The supplement plans most often sold are Plans F , G and N . An example : Say plan F is $ 150.00 a month - with no copays and virtually no out of pocket limit costs past on to the insured . A plan G may cost $ 100.00 a month , with $ 20.00 copays and still virtually no out of pocket limit costs past on to the insured . Plan G can be a great option to save monthly and have small $ 20.00 copays when you do need to see a physician . It is best to speak with an independent agent who sells both Medicare Advantage and Medicare Supplements , so that your education is complete , fair and unbiased . Hope this clarifies ! Belinda www.myseniorventure.com/answers
You can get Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage when you have Medicare Part A and/or Part B . You can purchase the plan through a broker licensed to sell Part D plans or sign up directly through the Medicare.gov website . If you do not enroll in a Part D plan when you 're first eligible , you would have to wait until the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- to get a plan - the effective date for the coverage would be January 1 of the following year . Another way to get a Part D plan outside of the AEP is qualifying for a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. coming off of group coverage -RRB- . For a full list of qualifying events and other Part D input , consult with an experienced broker -LRB- licensed for Part D coverage -RRB- or go to the Medicare.gov website . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A is `` free '' for most who meet the requirements for Medicare . Medicare Part B currently has a monthly premium of $ 105 for most people in 2013 but will be higher for those with higher incomes . Medicare Part D is a prescription drug plan available through private insurance carriers and has a monthly premium that varies by plan and zip code .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Do You Need In Renters Insurance ?
A renters Insurance policy does two things . First , it provides coverage for the physical damage or loss of your personal property from either named or broadly implied perils . So you would need to have an idea of the value of your belongings . Second , it provides liability protection for anything that you may be responsible or legally liable for . Injury to another person or damage to their property are examples .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
The only time renters insurance is actually required is if the landlord makes it a condition of the rental agreement . Landlords may do this in order to protect themselves from a potential law suit brought on by the tenants negligence . Other then that a renter is free to chose whether they wish to purchase renters insurance to protect their belonging , loss of use and liability or self insure and assume all the risk themselves by not having renters insurance . Renters insurance is so remarkably inexpensive for the protection you get I do not see why anyone would not obtain renters insurance .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
Renters Insurance is available for tenants in all States . Renters Insurance Policies cover personal property , additional living expenses , personal liability and medical payments to others . Renters Insurance can be purchased by tenants renting houses , apartment units , condos and townhomes . Renters Insurance is transferrable from one rental unit to another when the insured moves ; however , it is not transferrable across State lines since policies need to be rewritten according to State Department of Insurance regulations which are different in each State . Stillwater Insurance Group offers the most affordable options for renters ; there is also an online self service renters insurance platform available directly for clients ' use : WEBSITELINK Using the above link , you may obtain a free quote and purchase your insurance contract directly online . For further questions regarding any details , you may contact a licensed representative at : -LRB-877-RRB-931-3368 .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
If you are looking for Cheap Renters Insurance , Renters Insurance is very inexpensive . The best way to purchase Renters Insurance Online is to request the lowest Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- Coverage needed , the minimum Personal Liability Coverage needed and the highest deductible that you can afford ; this will provide the cheapest quote . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by Consumers . A great way to buy renters insurance online ! WEBSITELINK
A renter should have renters insurance to protect your assets , personal property and loss of use . However unless required by a landlord to carry renters insurancethen renters insurance is an option . I recommend you check with your auto insurance provider about obtaining renters insurance policy since in many cases the multi policy discount will off-set the cost of renters insurance .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can My Auto Insurance Company Cancel My Policy ?
Yes , they can , but there needs to be a solid reason to do so . For the most part , and this one is the most obvious , a policy can be cancelled for non payment of premium . Now by non payment , that includes one simply not paying the required premium within the grace period -LRB- if there is one -RRB- or bouncing a check for payment and then failing to pay the premium owed and any returned check service fees imposed . Another reason for non renewal can be that the insured just does not meet the underwriting standards of the company as they have been filed with the State Insurance Department . This can be anything from too many minor moving violationtickets or accidents to more serious cases that result in the suspension of one 's license . Unless the reason for cancellation is non payment of premium on a policy that has NO grace period beyond the due date , the insurance company is required to notify in advance of their cancellation action . The number of days in advance can vary by state , but typically it is 30 days .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Without specifics , `` it depends ... '' on what state the policy is written in . I am in New York and the NY Personal Auto Policy is required -LRB- by statute -RRB- to have some type of `` Rental Vehicle Coverage Endorsement ' . It is not optional . The endorsement sets forth an Insuring Agreement , Definitions , Priority of Payment , Exclusions , Subrogation , Duties after an Accident or Loss , and General Provisions . Coverage for the actual damage to or loss ofthe rental vehicle -LRB- with limitations -RRB- is provided ` regardless of fault . ' The endorsement does not set forth value or limit . Theoretically , I can rent a Rolls Royce , total it , and my carrier most likely pays the rental company the $ 350,000 value of the car including loss of use . My NY Rental Vehicle Coverage does not pay the ` reduction/diminution in value of the vehicle ' in the event it is repairable - thiscoveragecannot be added to my policy . Diminution of Value coverage is available through the physical damage insurance offered by the rental company -LRB- aka the collision damage waiver , etc -RRB- . A thorough reading of an Erie Personal Auto Insurance policy issued in your state is warranted as my answer only applies to theNew York Personal Auto Policy . Commercial or Business auto policies address rental vehicles in a different manner - a topic for a separate question .
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Life insurance is one of the investments that allows an individual to trade a low monthly ; payment for a life insurance policy that has a protection amount that is much higher than my monthly payment . If my monthly payment is $ 100 month and I have a policy of $ 500,000 do you consider that money well spent . The Life Insurance policy can aslo enable tax managment strategies if it is a `` cash value '' policy '' . The `` cash value '' builds and as long as I do not withdraw the earnings it is not taxable . So if I have had this policy for 18 years and my `` baby '' is now grown and driving my Subaru and needs money to go to college I can pull the cash value at intervals that allows me to minimize my consequences and my `` baby '' slides off to college . Is that a good `` investment vehicle '' ? Life Insurance also enables Estate Planning strategies enabling me to pass assets to my children without huge tax consequences .
Yes , you can cancel your auto insurance policy at any time . If you bought the insurance through an agent , you can simply call them and tell them you need to cancel your policy . If you bought the insurance directly from the insurance company , you contact them . There are two considerations . The first has to do with the amount of premium refund you will get if you cancel the policy prior to the expiration date . In most states , if the insured cancels a policy before the expiration date , the return premium is calculated on what is known as a `` short rate '' basis . The short rate calculation may include an extra 10 % to the insurance company to cover the expense of cancelling the policy . The second consideration is whether the auto has a lien against it . If you still owe money on your car , your lender will require that you replace the cancelled insurance right away with a new policy . And you ca n't hide this from the lender because the insurer you cancel with automatically notifies the lender that the insurance has been cancelled .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' renters insurance for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as renters , home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one company that offers the `` best '' or `` most affordable '' renters insurance for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners , renters , or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I live in Georgia also and have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Life Insurance passes by contract law . So if I have a $ 500,000 policy upon my death , assuming my wife is my beneficiary , the funeral home provides a `` death certificate '' to my wife who then files a claim with my insurance company and the proceeds is not tied up in my estate .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Much Will I Get Back From Medicare For An Ultrasound ?
The only time you should `` get money back '' from Medicare for an ultrasound is when you use a provider that does not accept assignment . Most medical providers do accept Medicare assignment , file claims direct with Medicare and they receive payments direct from Medicare . If you have a supplement plan Medicare sends your approved claim direct to your gap carrier who will send their payment to your provider .
If the ultrasound was done for a medically necessary reason , an ultrasound can be claimed on your Medicare coverage . If the ultrasound was done for pregnancy -LRB- the pregnant woman would most likely be disabled if receiving Medicare at an age at which she can carry a baby -RRB- , Medicare will cover ultrasounds again , as medically necessaary .
The only time you should `` get money back '' from Medicare for an ultrasound is when you use a provider that does not accept assignment . Most medical providers do accept Medicare assignment , file claims direct with Medicare and they receive payments direct from Medicare . If you have a supplement plan Medicare sends your approved claim direct to your gap carrier who will send their payment to your provider .
Ultrasounds are covered under Medicare . If they 're completed as an inpatient in a hospital , it would be covered by Part A . If they 're completed on an outpatient basis , it would be covered under Part B. Please note , the ultrasound mustbe deemed medically necessary to help diagnose a medical problem by your physician . Medicare typically pays for about 80 % of the expenses - you would be responsible for paying the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement policy can help pay the remaining 20 % . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part B covers a wide range of diagnostic tests . Regarding ultrasounds being covered under Part B , the ultrasound must be completed on an outpatient basis and be deemed medically necessary to help diagnose a medical problem by your physician . If they 're completed as an inpatient in a hospital , it would be covered by Part A. Part B will pay for 80 % of the expenses - you 're responsible for paying the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement plan would cover these expenses . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Ultrasound exams are usually a few hundred dollars when you have health insurance . The Health Care Blue Book shows a price of $ 158 for an abdominal ultrasound including physician fees . Ultrasound on other body parts may be more or less . You should ask your doctor about costs in advance and negotiate an acceptable rate .
This question is usually asked about Medicaid in regards to pregnancy . However , if the question is addressed for Medicare , the answer appears to be the same whether over age 65 and the ultrasounds are used for testing for health conditions , or for a pregnant women who are on Medicare due to being disabled . The criteria is simply that the ultrasounds must be medically necessary and performed by a provider that participates in Medicare .
Short Answer : Yes , Medicare pays for Ultrasounds . However , if you have only `` Original '' Medicare -LRB- Part A and Part B -RRB- , you will be responsible for 20 % . If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan , diagnostic testing varies from plan to plan ... you could owe anywhere from $ 0 to 20 % . If you have a Medicare Supplement , your share of cost depends on which supplement you have .
If you are covered under Medicare and become pregnant , Medicare does cover prenatal care including medically necessary testing such as ultrasound . Medicare will also cover labor and delivery expenses . Since Medicare is normally for those who are 65 and older -LRB- exceptions for those covered due to a disability -RRB- perhaps you are thinking about Medicaid .
Ultrasounds are covered under Medicare . If they 're completed as an inpatient in a hospital , it would be covered by Part A . If they 're completed on an outpatient basis , it would be covered under Part B. Medicare typically pays for about 80 % of the expenses - you would be responsible for paying the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement policy can help pay the remaining 20 % .
Depending upon the applicant 's age and ultrasound results , it is possible in certain cases to obtain life insurance coverage . The range of premium cost would also take into consideration your age and any other medical issues . Your ability to obtain coverage will significantly increase when your original diagnosis is at or over age 50 .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Yes , you can change from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . You must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to original Medicare . If you joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you first signed up for Medicare and are changing to Medigap within 12 months , you can choose from any Medigap policy . If you had a Medigap policy , switched to Medicare Advantage , and decided within 12 months to go back to Medigap , you can get your old policy back if it is still available . However , it will no longer have the prescription drug coverage . You may be able to get that from Medicare Part D.
You need to get at least as much coverage as the insurance carrier says is required to rebuild your home . Insurance carriers will provide a calculation of how much it should cost to rebuild the home in a certain area . If you go below that amount then there could be penalties in how much the insurance company will pay out . On a related note , you should obtain a guaranteed replacement cost increase . This guarantees that you will get an extra amount of coverage -LRB- usually a percentage of your current coverage -RRB- to rebuild your home in the case of a catastrophic loss . This way , if you want to rebuild on a nice piece of land , you will not be stuck fronting more money in order to get back to where you were . In summary , never low ball your coverage to save money because you will end up paying out-of-pocket to get back to the status quo .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
When buying Disability insurance you need to consider how many years you want it to last , how many months you want to wait from incurring the disability until you receive the first payment -LRB- elimination period -RRB- , and how much of your income you want to replace . You need to consider features like whether it will pay if you are able to go back to work but not are not back up to your old wages -LRB- residual disability -RRB- , whether it will pay if you can not perform your own occupation , and whether it has a cost of living rider . Finally , you need to consider your budget and how much of the above you can afford , then pick out the features that are most important to you .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best way to think about it is , to imagine that your unit has been gutted by a fire . You have lost everything that you own . How much money will you want ? If you take pictures of your unit you will know what you had . If you estimated the replacement cost for each item , you would know how much you would want . I suggest that number guide you in selecting a renters policy . If a process server appears at your door with a lawsuit , how much back up do you want ? I suggest you take as much liability coverage as the insurance company offers .
Term Life Insurance does not have cash value , but if you get what is called Return of Premium Term -LRB- ROP Term -RRB- , it has a form of cash value . About midway through the term , depending on the policy , it will pay back some of the premiums paid in , IF you cancel the policy . By the end of the term , this type of policy will generally pay back all the premiums you paid in . Some negatives : This cash is not available unless you surrender the policy . If you are table rated , it may be that only the premiums up to standard are paid back to you . The price is substantially higher than regular Term Life Insurance . Some positives : If you bought regular Term Life and invested the extra you would have spent on ROP Term , it could take a return of over 5 % every year on the difference , to earn what you would get back , tax free , by keeping ROP Term to the end . Unlike regular Term , longer terms often cost less than shorter terms , with ROP Term . Finally , getting back all your premiums if you are still alive at the end of the term is a great way to have `` free '' coverage and then get back enough for a final expense fund when the term ends .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Voluntary Life Insurance A Pretax Deduction ?
Ifyou own and pay for the voluntary life plan you do not want it to ba taken pre-tax unless you absolutely hate your beneficiary as by taking a tax deduction for your life insurance , that action makes the benefit a taxable occurance . Currently employers can deduct the expense of life insurance up to 50,000 face amount as a busines expense and the outcome to the employee is not taxed . The employee never paid the premium , the employer did as a benefit . It is much different if the employee pays . There may be some very rare situations where you can deduct the premium , but that is very rare .
Voluntary life insurance that exceeds the $ 50,000 provided to you by your employer does not receive any tax deduction . However , the death benefit left to your beneficiary is usually tax free , which can be a consideration when looking at the big picture .
If you are self employed and you contribute to your own health insurance plan then the tax code allows deductions for `` contribution to a self employed health insurance plan . If you work a corporation and you are a W-2 employee your employer can sponsor a Health Insurance Plan , like a `` cafeteria plan '' and your contributions are paid with `` pretax dollars '' . The complication arises when you have incurred expenses and you want to deduct those expenses to reduce your tax then the expenses can not be deducted because your contributions to the plan are paid with `` pretax dollars ''
Life insurance can not be deducted or purchased pretax . There are some pretax qualified plans that allow a percentage of the annual contribution to use life insurance : participating whole life -LRB- 49.5 % -RRB- and universal life -LRB- 25 % -RRB- . Life insurance as a TAMRA compliant non-modified endowment policy can serve as a supplemental income plan in tandem with qualified plans .
Voluntary term life is a group product where participation is not mandatory . An employee can choose to purchase voluntary life , usually through payroll deduction . Depending on the plan , voluntary can be a guaranteed issue or simple underwriting plan . Guaranteed Issue would just be signing up and paying the premium and Simplified Issue might involve answering a few questions . Either way , most will pay more in price for these plans . Simple rule of thumb with insurance , the fewer questions , the higher the cost . If you 're a fit person , in good shape and health , a voluntary payroll plan gives you some convenience , but not any cost savings .
Usually the term `` Voluntary '' life insurance refers to a policy which may be purchased through your place of employment . Generally `` Voluntary '' life insurance is purchased through a group contract made between your employer and the insurance company . `` Voluntary '' life insurance can be a very good purchase as some companies will relax their underwriting requirements for those who participate and some insurance companies will even offer guarenteed issue type policies for those employees that participate . One of the other benefits of these policies is that they may be able to have the premiums deducted from your pay check according to how you are paid -LRB- weekly , bi-weekly , monthly , etc -RRB- . Other than how they are purchased `` Voluntary '' life policies are the same as any other life policy that you can by , in that they allow you to own the policy and assign beneficiaries as you desire . In most cases , if you leave your employment you may continue your policy by paying the monthly premiums from your bank account as they come due . I would caution though , that you should talk to the insurance company representative , when they come to enroll the group or service the account , as some policies may have different rules than others .
What is voluntary term life insurance ? Usually it is a program offered through your employer to provide employees with an opportunity to purchase life insurance through work and payroll deduction . In some cases , voluntary group life offers life coverage at a higher cost , but with fewer health questions and no lab testing . The thing to keep in mind when considering life insurance is the more questions they can ask , the cheaper the cost will be for a healthy person . That does n't mean Voluntary life is bad , it means you may find coverage cheaper elsewhere .
What is voluntary life insurance ? Voluntary life insurance is usually something you 'll find in the workplace offered through your employer 's HR office . The voluntary means it 's an optional benefit choice for an employee . Usually voluntary life is sold on a guaranteed basis with little to no underwriting . Again since the few questions , the higher the cost or the lower the benefit .
You may be able to claim health insurance premiums on your taxes . If you pay your premiums at work via a pretax payroll contribution , you are already receiving a tax benefit , and these expenses would not be deductible . If you are self employed you can take the deduction on line 29 of form 1040 . If your plan provides for reimbursement directly to providers -LRB- most traditional plans do , while supplemental plans do not -RRB- , you can deduct the premiums on Schedule A as part of un-reimbursed medical expenses . Keep in mind that tax savings do n't begin until your deductible medical expenses reach ten percent of your adjusted gross income .
Employee life insurance usually refers to a group term life insurance plan provided as a benefit for employees of a company . But employee life insurance can also include voluntary plans and business life insurance policies such as those used in conjunction with a non-qualified deferred compensation agreement . In some cases the employer pays all or part of the premium . Voluntary life premiums are normally paid by the employee . Group term life plans and voluntary insurance allow the employee to name the beneficiary . Business life insurance plans usually have the employer as the beneficiary .
Technically there are n't voluntary health insurance plans but there are voluntary insurance plans that are designed to supplement your existing health insurance plan . Voluntary benefit plans are one of the few growth areas in the health insurance market space and we are seeing new products being introduced and new insurance companies entering this arena on a regular basis these days . Generally , when people are talking about supplementary health plans they are referring to insurance policies that address specific issues such as ; 1 -RRB- Accident insurance - makes a payment to the policyholder when the experience a covered accident like falling and breaking your arm . 2 -RRB- Hospital Indemnity - these policies usually pay a fixed dollar amount per day or per admission for a hospitalization . These policies may also provide fixed dollar benefits for a certain number of doctor 's office visits , urgent care/minor medial or emergency room visits . 3 -RRB- Critical Illness - these policies pay a fixed amount upon the diagnosis of certain specified illnesses such as heart attacks & strokes , organ transplants , cancer , kidney failure . The illnesses covered and the benefit amount will vary from one supplementary insurance carrier to another and from policy to policy . 4 -RRB- Cancer - these policies specifically address the diagnosis and treatment of various types of cancer . 5 -RRB- GAP Plans - plans designed to cover the financial exposure of having a high deductible health insurance plan . There are other variations on the theme and , as stated earlier , this is an area where new products are constantly being introduced . While this trend has been going on for a while , it has certainly been accelerated with passage of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- and the need to address the movement towards higher deductible plans that shift more cost onto the insured person .
As stated , voluntary Term is offered on group policies and is voluntary , meaning you do not have to take it . Term insurance means that it is only offered for a specific period . Never rely on voluntary term as your whole insurance package . This only covers you while you are employed . That is why it is called term insurance . Some contracts will allow you to convert it to a permanent policy if you leave your job but that would be at a much higher rate . Most however do not offer that option . Some individual health policies also offer voluntary term insurance . This covers you while you have that policy but you lose it if you change insurance companies . You are better off in most cases to purchase insurance on your own .
Disability Insurance benefit is based on your current monthly income . You should calculate how much your current monthly expenses are and determine the net benefit needed . If you have Disability Insurance through your employer then you will need to determine if the benefit is pretax or post tax . A pretax benefit paid by your employer means that you will be taxed when you receive benefits . Your net benefit would be substantially lowered after you pay taxes . You can supplement your work policy with an Individual Disability policy to make up the difference to meet you monthly expenses . An Individual Disability policy is underwritten by the company so will have to qualify based on health , age , tobacco , your occupation , and amount of your monthly income . Each company will have limits as to how much of your income you can cover with your policy . The percentage is usually between 67 % and 70 % . You should work with an Independent Agent and determine the best option for you . They will need to know your expenses , income , and the amount of benefit needed . The Agent will need to look for the company that best fits your desired benefit .
A qualified plan is generally a government approved define benefit or defined contribution retirement plan . It is generally has a pretax or tax deductible privilege for the plan participant and accumulates tax deferred . Non-qualified plans are not tax deductible , but do accumulate tax deferred with annuities and/or life insurance .
You can not claim life insurance as a deduction nor can you contribute to life insurance with pretax contributions . There are a few qualified defined benefit contribution plans that permit a portion of your annual contribution to fund life insurance , i.e. whole life 49.5 % and universal life 25 % .
You 've touched on one of the inequities of our system , the essentially unequal tax treatment of individual versus group health insurance . Group health insurance plans are tax advantaged in two ways ; 1 -RRB- what the employer pays towards coverage is a deductible business expense , and 2 -RRB- the employee 's share of their insurance premium costs can be deducted from their paychecks on a pretax basis and reducing their net cost of buying health insurance . Neither of these tax advantages apply to individual health insurance coverage a person might purchase for themselves . Though , as of January 1 , 2014 , under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act , person 's purchasing individual health insurance through the government marketplaces may qualify for an advanced premium tax subsidy depending upon their income level . So , in simple terms , in the group health insurance world you may be able to pay for your portion of your health insurance on a pre-tax basis but in the individual health insurance world you are generally in a post-tax payment environment -LRB- I 'm not going to stray into how some small business owners structure their business expenses and taxes as it regards these matters -RRB- .
Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance is a group disability insurance plan offered to employees at group rates . It is usually provided through payroll deductions . Voluntary Long Term Disability Insurance will pay a portion of the employee 's salary to them in cash if the employee is disabled due to illness or injury .
Voluntary Term Life Insurance is offered to employees who have some life insurance provided to them by their employers , and their employers are giving them the opportunity to purchase additional life insurance coverage at group rates . Employer provided life insurance is not taxable to $ 50,000 whereas voluntary life insurance purchased beyond that amount will be a taxable to the employee .
The IRS taxes the value on the employer sponsored group benefit term life insurance exceeding $ 50,000 . The taxable portion is the imputed income . The monthly premium for employer sponsored group benefit term life insurance is payroll deducted , i.e. pretax . The amount over $ 50,000 is added to your taxable salary or imputed income . Here 's ING 's calculator : WEBSITELINK
What is voluntary short term disability insurance ? Probably something offered through payroll deduction by your employer to provide extra income protection for their employees . STDI is paycheck protection in case of illness or off the clock injury that would n't be covered by worker 's comp . This is for those broken legs skiing or sliding into second . Those weeks of chemo when you 're too sick to work . Voluntary means it is up to you how valuable this coverage is .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Sewer Line Replacement Covered By Homeowners Insurance ?
You can purchase an endorsement called Water/Sewer Backup which will cover resulting damage from a water/sewer line backup . The sewer line itself is not covered but the resulting damage is covered . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses . It is not a maintenance policy and it does not cover damage from wear and tear so if you sewer line needs to be replaced because it is old or tree roots have cracked the pipe , there is no coverage .
You can purchase an endorsement called Water/Sewer Backup which will cover resulting damage from a water/sewer line backup . The sewer line itself is not covered but the resulting damage is covered . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses . It is not a maintenance policy and it does not cover damage from wear and tear so if you sewer line needs to be replaced because it is old or tree roots have cracked the pipe , there is no coverage .
Not normally . Your home insurance was designed to repair or replace your home if something covered happens to it . Usually , anything below ground is n't covered . Now , if your home is destroyed and the insurance company rebuilds your home , they will usually pay to hook your sewer up , but not to repair or replace the pipes . if you think about the things that can happen to a home , a sewer pipe really ca n't have those things happen to it . My big question here is : what the heck happened to your sewer pipes that you want covered ? Insurance is designed to repair damage that is sudden and accidental . There are n't many things you can do to a sewer pipe that are sudden and accidental . About the only thing I can think of is if someone working underground hits a sewer pipe and breaks it . In this case the company working there is responsible for any damage they may cause .
It depends upon the source of the water damage , the type of policy you have and whether the house is abandoned . To make this answer easier , lets assume that you have a Homeowners 3 policy and the house is either occupied or vacant -LRB- some furniture and presence -RRB- . Water damage from a burst pipe : typically your homeowners insurance will water damage from a burst pipe , however it will not cover the damaged pipe . You can get an endorsement to cover the damaged pipes . Water damage from rain/hail/wind : this will only be covered on a basic homeowners policy if the rain/hail caused the hole in the roof that lead to the water damage in your bathroom . Once again , you can get an endorsement to cover rain/hail/wind damage . Water damage from sewer backup or sump-pump failure : if the bathroom is in the basement and the water damage if from sewer backup or sump-pump failure you can only get coverage for this IF you have the appropriate endorsement - sewer and water backup . Please note that this is typically a sub-limit in your policy and goes towards both cleanup and replacement . I hope this helps .
In most cases it will not . It would really depend on the circumstances behind the broken sewer line . If the broken sewer line was caused by a covered loss than you may be covered for some or all of the damage . To know what coverage your policy provides and what exclusions there may be ; please read it completely or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
Not all ! Accidental discharge of water and its attendant damages is normally covered . This means when there is an accidental discharge of liquids or steam from the plumbing , heating or air-conditionaing the loss is a covered loss . It is very important to understand what is not covered . Flood is one of the most common causes of loss in the US and the homeowner 's policy does not cover it . Water back up such as from a blocked sewer line is not a covered loss -LRB- some companies offer the coverage as an option . -RRB- When there is repeated or continuous seepage or leakage from a system in the house that is not covered .
Good idea to check with your Insurance Professional about your particular policy , but in general , it is not likely that your Homeowners ' policy will cover a broken sewer line . For the most part , these breaks can occur due to some form of earth movement around the pipe and earth movement damage is excluded from coverage in a standard Homeowners ' policy unless endorsed onto the contract .
Homeowners Insurance will not cover a broken pipe or sewer line unless the cause may have occurred due to freezing which would be a sudden event , not normal wear . However the spillage caused by a bursting pipe may be covered if their is damage to your dwelling . So in other words if a pipe just busts and there is no damage to the dwelling there is no coverage . If there is damage to the dwelling then the dwelling is covered but the pipe is still not covered .
Usually no . . however some insurance companies will allow you to add a `` service line '' endorsement that could provide coverage for a sewer line . Typically it will only cover the portion that runs through your property .
Coverage for water damage is restricted by exclusions from the homeowners policy . if the leak is from outside water -LRB- roof , windows , -RRB- it isnt covered . If it is from a back-up of a sewer or drain , it is not covered -LRB- unless you have bought that additional coverage . -RRB- If it is from water that is coming into the house from the ground through the foundation , it is not covered . The normal scenario is that a water line bursts and floods a room or more . what you do once the leak is detected is critical in limiting damage -LRB- which is your responsibility . -RRB- Know where the water shut off valve is located in your house . Call your agent , company or a remediation contractor . Get the flow stopped . Get the water removed ; Get your property properly dried . the damage might be much less than you expect . the damage is covered after the deductible is satisfied .
Normally , No . A homeowners policy normally excludes coverage for normal wear and tear . A policyholder might be able to argue that the sewer line was damaged by one of the covered perils but it is very difficult to imagine that .
Sewer lines or plumbing or not a covered peril of a homeowners policy if you are referring to the pipes alone either wearing out , plugging up or breaking , not to mention root damage . However should a pipe burst and causedamageto your dwelling there should be coverage . Irecommendyou talk to your local agent about the specifics of your potential loss to see if there is coverage .
While not intending to disagree with a colleague , it would be my opinion most homeowners insurance policies should cover a toilet overflow . The most common homeowners policy -LRB- HO-3 or its equivalent -RRB- should cover any accidental direct damage to the dwelling unless there is a specific exclusion or limitation . The accidental escape of water from a plumbing system is a fairly common `` covered '' peril . Granted if a sewer back up originates in a public sewer system or the damage is not sudden , you may have a coverage problem but a simple accidental overflow should not be excluded and therefore `` covered '' . However , I might not consider filing a claim unless the damage is significant.Insurers are quick to increase premiums or non-renew policies following claim activity .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
The annual premium for a homeowners insurance policy is an individual computation because the policy itself is tailored to the specific requirements of the named insured and the property being covered . Even though premiums and coverages may be similar in a neighborhood with similar homes , there will usually be peculiarities that will make most of them somewhat different . Every home has a fire rating . That fire rating is based upon proximity to a manned fire station and adequate water . Those ratings are published and used by most insurance companies . The fire rating is often a mystery to homeowners because they rely upon the fire station down the road one mile , however , their home is not in the district covered by that fire station . There are complicated agreements between fire districts that allow them to cross boundaries and assist in fires but each has a primary area of coverage that always receives priority . Homeowners often rely upon standing bodies of water and consider them adequate for firefighting . Again , that is a matter of evaluation and does enter into the fire rating . However , a swimming pool will not necessarily improve the fire rating of a home . Insurance companies mine the mountains of information available on losses and can identify the loss differences based upon territories . These territories are usually bounded by zip codes . They become a part of the rating process that determines the premium charged for coverage . The major determinant in the development of the premium for a homeowners policy is the cost of rebuilding the residence . Because a homeowners policy is based upon a formula , this amount drives the amount of coverages extended to personal property and non-attached structures on the property . This figure is determined , generally , by an outside evaluation system . Frequently the cost of rebuilding the residence doesnt match the price paid for the house or the estimated value of the house . While this is a source of consternation it is the cost of rebuilding the residence that guides the limits of the policy . There are certain risks that are excluded or limited . Coverage for some of these can be purchased in the homeowners policy . There might be a limit on the coverage for guns , jewelry , furs , currency and art . Some of this coverage can be purchased . There are exclusions for flood and earthquake and limited earthquake coverage is usually available for purchase . Flood insurance is almost always a separate policy . An often overlooked coverage is sewer backup . This is excluded in most policies but coverage can be purchased . Another is law and ordinance . The additional cost of repairing a house caused by changes in laws and ordinances is not covered in a normal policy but that coverage can be purchased . Liability insurance is the second part of a homeowners policy and could be the most important . The coverage extends to claims of personal injury and property damage and covers a wide range of scenarios . The homeowner can select the limit of coverage and this affects the premium . This is a place where a homeowner can be penny-wise and pound foolish . You can not have too much liability insurance . The computation for a homeowners premium is complicated . Some of the pricing is your individual choices and preference . Consult with a licensed agent for advice as choosing incorrect limits can lead to extreme displeasure at the time of a claim .
A homeowners policy provides coverage for damage sustained because of specified perils . It is very difficult to imagine a situation where this might apply to sewer pipes . The most common conditions that could lead to sewer pipes being cracked is earth movement and flooding and both of these perils are specifically excluded in most homeowners policies .
It may . Whether or not the broken sewer pipes are covered by your homeowners isnurance policy is going to depend on if the damage was caused by a covered loss . If the broken sewer pipes claim was covered you would also be susecptable to your policy 's deductible . Please read your policy completely to find out about the coverage offered and any exclusions that may be contained within or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy wilth you .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
As a rule no , toilet overflow is a maintenance issue . The only time there may be coverage is if the overflow is caused by sewer backup . Some companies will provide coverage for sewer backup , usually as an endorsement on your policy . Check with your agent to find out if your policy has sewer backup coverage .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Are Medigap Plans ?
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and can help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap and Med Advantage plans are SIGNIFICANTLY different . For a MedAdvantage Plan , they are basically like an HMO . You have a primary physician who is essentially the gate keeper . You do need referrals and you do have co-pays . A Med Advantage plan does also contain a drug plan component , which the supplements do not . If you have significant health issues , than of course the co-pays can add up , however the monthly premium is usually significantly less than the average Medigap plan . Medigap Plans again , are significantly different . The coverage provided by a Medigap Plan is dependent upon what plan you get . The plans are all identified by a corresponding letter . For example , an F Plan tends to offer the most solid coverage , but of course the price is among the highest as you 'd expect . Each lettered plan is written and designed by the government , so no F Plan is different than another , no G is different than another G , etc etc. . What is different is what each individual insurance company charges for the play . So it 's not uncommon for company A to charge 1 price for an F Plan , and companies B , C , D , & E all have significantly different prices for the exact SAME COVERAGE . One thing that I would do is make sure you understand how each lettered plan works , because the difference in coverage can be quite significant . For example , make sure you understand exactly what a `` Part B Excess Charge '' is . In some states , such as PA , they are illegal , but in my state , which is NJ they are perfectly legal . If you purchase a plan that does n't cover the Part B Excess Charge , you could find yourself pleasantly surprised by a significant bill if you ever have a major procedure done . Medigap Plans DO NOT come with a drug plan , or vision plan or dental . A Drug Plan is the only one you are REQUIRED to get , or you could face a penalty by the government . But again , the drug plan must be purchased on the side , as there is no such thing as a Medigap that comes with a drug plan .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The best Medigap Plan is the one that meets your needs . With that said , Medigap Plan F is widely touted as the best Medigap Plan . It 's very popular because it has the most comprehensive health care coverage of all Medigap Plans . Medigap Plan F covers all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance . As long as you pay your monthly premium , you will receive your Medigap Plan F benefits . Some would argue that Medigap Plan G is becoming the ` best ' Medigap Plan . It acts just like Plan F after satisfying the annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium for Plan G is often lower than Plan F. . . which is why many people like it . It 's a personal preference as to whether or not you want to pay the Part B deductible yourself -LRB- Plan G -RRB- or have the insurance company do it for you -LRB- Plan F -RRB- . Some of my clients do n't like to be bothered with paying any bills , so Medigap Plan F works for them . While I have other clients who would rather save money on their premium and do n't mind satisfying the deductible . If would like more information regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me . In a matter of minutes , I can provide you with information on Medigap benefits and quotes for your area .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- offers great peace of mind when it comes to your health care . Original Medicare Part A and Part B , generally cover 80 % of your Medicare approved amounts for covered medical costs . Medigap Plans will help pay that remaining 20 % by covering the costs of copays , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some people think they do n't need a Medigap Plan because they have n't had any health issues . While that is great news , we do n't have a crystal ball to predict the future . A Medigap Plan that is already in place is there to offer that protection when you need it . If you wait until a significant health issue arises , it may be too late . Medicare Supplement insurance companies use medical underwriting to issue policies . If you 're not in a Guaranteed Issue or Initial Enrollment situation , you will have to answer health questions . Medigap policies do not fall under the Affordable Care Act umbrella , so insurance companies can deny you a policy based on your health . I 'll close with an example of a lady who called me wanting to add a Medigap Plan to her Original Medicare Part A and Part B . She was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mastectomy . As you can imagine , her hospital and doctor bills were substantial and she was looking for some help . I had to share the unfortunate news with her that because of her recent diagnosis she would not be able to apply for a Medigap policy at this time , but possibly in two years we could re-evaluate her situation . That 's quite a bit of time for more bills to pile up . Had she already put a Medigap Plan in place , her savings would be substantial . Just for example sake , a Medigap Plan F might cost someone $ 130 a month or $ 1,560 over twelve months . Still a lot lower than 20 % of a $ 100,000 operation . A couple of the most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. & nbspMedigap Plan F will cover all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any deductibles , co-insurance , or co-pays . Plan G acts just like Plan F after you have met the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you would like more information about the benefits of Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 . You can also visit my website at www.remedigap.com and check out my client testimonials .
It depends a lot on which Medigap Plan you have . Medigap Plans are designed to cover most of what original Medicare Part A & Part B does not cover . However , all Medigap Plans do not have prescription drug coverage . You would need to get a Part D plan in addition to cover prescriptions . This is a good thing because you will be able to change your drug plan as your prescription needs change without needing to change your Medigap Plan . Medigap Plans also do not cover dental and vision , however , you can get a separate dental/vision plan . The quickest way to find out what Medigap Plans cover and is to go to our website . You can compare Medigap Plans instantly online at SummitMedigap.com .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It can be overwhelming research Medigap on your own . The best way to choose a Medigap Plan is to work with an independent agent . Trying to navigate the internet is time consuming and actually limits your Medigap choices . However you wish to proceed , make sure you look at a comparison chart and Outline of Coverage for the 10 standardized Medigap Plans . They each have varying benefits . You 'll want to determine which benefits are important to you and which Medigap plan best fits your budget . The two most popular plans are Medigap Plan F and Plan G. Medigap Plan F will cover all the gaps in Medicare coverage . You do n't have to meet any deductibles , co-pays or co-insurance . Medigap Plan G acts just like Plan F -- after you 've met the small $ 147 annual Part B deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F . If you would like assistance in comparing plans and premiums , please contact me . My personalized service is always free .
Yes . You can apply for a new Medigap plan at any point during the year . People often change their Medigap plans for a number of reasons , the most common being : You want to reduce your expenses by securing a lower premium from a policy with the same benefits -LRB- purchasing a Plan F with company B and dropping the existing Plan F with company A -RRB- . - this is the most common reason why people change their Medigap plans . Medigap plans are standardized so the coverage under a plan F is the same regardless of the company it 's through . So often people want to look at lowering their premiums when their policy gets hit with a rate increase . You may not need/want all of the benefits you 're paying for or you need/want more benefits than you have under your existing plan . Please note , if you do not have a guaranteed-issue right to purchase a Medigap plan without any medical underwriting , you would have to answer the health questions on the application . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable . So in the event you could not medically qualify for coverage under a new Medigap plan , you always have the option of keeping what you have . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a new Medigap plan at any point during the year . People often change their Medigap plans for a number of reasons , the most common being : You want to reduce your expenses by securing a lower premium from a policy with the same benefits -LRB- purchasing a Plan F with company B and dropping the existing Plan F with company A -RRB- . - this is the most common reason why people change their Medigap plans . Medigap plans are standardized so the coverage under a plan F is the same regardless of the company it 's through . So often people want to look at lowering their premiums when their policy gets hit with a rate increase . You may not need/want all of the benefits you 're paying for or you need/want more benefits than you have under your existing plan . Please note , if you do not have a guaranteed-issue right to purchase a Medigap plan without any medical underwriting , you would have to answer the health questions on the application . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable . So in the event you could not medically qualify for coverage under a new Medigap plan , you always have the option of keeping what you have . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- help seniors cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of healthcare expenses - a Medigap plan can pay all or a portion of the other 20 % , depending on which plan you have . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- with a Medigap plan will help you limit your out-of-pocket expenses and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Original Medicare will also accept your Medigap plan . There are 10 different Medigap plans and they are all standardized - meaning each plan type is exactly the same from every insurance company regardless of who you have your coverage through -LRB- the only difference being the price you pay for your Medigap plan -RRB- . The 10 Medigap plans are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . The benefits that can be secured under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Part A hospitalization deductible 6 -RRB- Part B medical deductible 7 -RRB- Part B excess charges 8 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility co-insurance 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap Plan G is a standardized Medicare Supplement insurance plan designed to fill in the ` gaps ' that Medicare does n't pay . Medigap Plan G covers 100 % of the following after meeting the Part B deductible $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- : 1 . Medicare Part A Coinsurance and Medicare approved hospital costs 2 . Medicare Part B Coinsurance or Copayment 3 . Blood -LRB- First 3 Pints -RRB- 4 . Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Copayment 5 . Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance 6 . Medicare Part A Deductible 7 . Medicare Part B Excess Charges 8 . Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- While Medigap Plan G benefits are standardized , it is sold through private health insurance companies . This means any insurance company that offers Medigap Plan G is required by law to provide Medigap Plan G benefits . The only difference is price . ABC insurance company can charge a completely different premium than XYZ insurance company for the same exact Medigap Plan G. It 's best to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can shop the market for you . We have contracts with insurance companies that you do not see online . This is how we help our clients find low Medigap Plan G premiums . Afterall , Plan G is Plan G -- you might as well find the the plan with the best rate . Please feel free to contact me if I can assist you with your specific situation . In just a matter of minutes , I can provide you with quotes for Medigap Plan G in your area .
The `` best '' Medigap policy is plan F because it covers all benefits at 100 % from day 1 . Plan G is competitive with plan F because it covers everything just like plan F except for the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The predictability in healthcare expenses these 2 plans have created for people have made these the 2 most desireable plans to have . In general , you would start by looking at the benefits you want to have covered . If you want to just write a check for a premium and not have to worry about big hospitals when you need procedures and surgeries done , you should consider plan F or plan G . If you 're willing to share more of the risk of expenses to lower your premium , you may want to consider a plan N or plan Hi-F . Refer to the Medigap guidebook -LRB- available on the Medicare.gov website - you can also email me for a copy and I 'll forward it to you -RRB- . Once you 've determined which of the 11 available Medigap plans you want to purchase , the next factor to look at is price . Every Medigap plan gets paid in the exact same way , regardless of the insurance company you have the insurance through . For example , if company A is charging $ 125 per month for a plan F and company B is charging $ 150 per month for a plan F , you would want to buy the plan F from company A because they 're saving you $ 25 per month and the benefits are the exact same either way . Please remember , if you 're applying outside of your initial open enrollment period when you 're new to Medicare , you may be subject to medical underwriting and have to answer the health questions . This is where an independent Medigap insurance broker really comes in handy as they can shop the case for you among many companies instead of just 1 or 2 to make sure you get the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap plan -LRB- I 'm an independent Medigap broker -RRB- and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a new Medigap plan at any point during the year . People often change their Medigap plans for a number of reasons , the most common being : You want to reduce your expenses by securing a lower premium from a policy with the same benefits -LRB- purchasing a Plan F with company B and dropping the existing Plan F with company A -RRB- . - this is the most common reason why people change their Medigap plans . Medigap plans are standardized so the coverage under a plan F is the same regardless of the company it 's through . So often people want to look at lowering their premiums when their policy gets hit with a rate increase . You may not need/want all of the benefits you 're paying for or you need/want more benefits than you have under your existing plan . Please note , if you do not have a guaranteed-issue right to purchase a Medigap plan without any medical underwriting , you would have to answer the health questions on the application . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable . So in the event you could not medically qualify for coverage under a new Medigap plan , you always have the option of keeping what you have . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes . You can apply for a new Medigap plan at any point during the year . People often change their Medigap plans for a number of reasons , the most common being : You want to reduce your expenses by securing a lower premium from a policy with the same benefits -LRB- purchasing a Plan F with company B and dropping the existing Plan F with company A -RRB- . - this is the most common reason why people change their Medigap plans . Medigap plans are standardized so the coverage under a plan F is the same regardless of the company it 's through . So often people want to look at lowering their premiums when their policy gets hit with a rate increase . You may not need/want all of the benefits you 're paying for You need/want more benefits than you have under your existing plan Please note , if you do not have a guaranteed-issue right to purchase a Medigap plan without any medical underwriting , you would have to answer the health questions on the application . Medigap plans are guaranteed renewable . So in the event you could not medically qualify for coverage under a new Medigap plan , you always have the option of keeping what you have . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Each Medigap plan can be offered as a `` select '' plan . The premiums for these plans are generally less than those of the traditional Medigap plans , however , they require you use in-network doctors and hospitals -LRB- much like how an HMO works -RRB- to receive full benefits -LRB- except in the case of an emergency -RRB- . If you use a provider outside of the network , you may be responsible for the co-insurance that is not covered under Original Medicare as long as you use a doctor/hospital that accepts Medicare , If you buy a select Medigap plan and decide you would rather have a standard Medigap plan , you can change it to the standard plan within 12 months of when you started the coverage . A common question with select plans is `` if I move , can I take my coverage with me ? . Under select Medigap plans , you would have a guaranteed-issue right to purchase a new Medigap plan which plans are available depends on your zip code as not every plan is available in a given location . If applying for a new Medigap plan via a guaranteed-issue right , you can apply as early as 60 calendar days and up to 63 days after your coverage ended to buy a plan . Under a standard plan , you can take the plan with you as they are guaranteed renewable and have no networks . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is Waiting Period In Disability Insurance ?
Disability Insurance is intended to provide coverage in the event of a disability that prohibits a person from being able to work . The understanding for this type of policy is that a certain amount of time must elapse to prove disability . That is called the waiting period . It is expected that the insured will cover their own expenses until the waiting period has expired and benefits can begin .
The elimination period is basicallythe policy deductible and is usually the number of days from the onset of disability for which no benefits are payable . Typical waiting periods are 30 , 90 or 180 days , though some policies do have 365 day waiting periods . The longer the waiting period , the cheaper the policy .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
Yes , Disability Insurance has a waiting period that you select yourself . Your premium will correspond inversely to the length of the waiting period you pick . I.e. . A policy with a 3 month waiting period will have a lower premium than a policy with a 1 month waiting period . The waiting periods are called elimination periods . Your agent can help you select the one that best fits your needs and budget .
The elimination period in long term care insurance is the number of days that you must wait after long-term care begins before the policy will start to pay benefits . This is also called a waiting period . Most policies offer a choice of elimination period lengths . Common choices are , for example , 0 days , 20 days , 50 days , or 100 days . Typically , the shorter the waiting period , the higher the premium will be for the policy . Ask to see how the elimination period works for the policy you are considering as some policies have a once-in-a-lifetime waiting period while other policies require that a new waiting period begins each time a new period of care begins .
When does disability insurance kick in ? You can expect to receive a disability check 30 days after your waiting period ends . The waiting period is the time you decide to self insure to lower your premium . The longer the waiting period , the lower the cost . Payments actually begin 30 days after the end of the waiting period .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
The Waiting Period for Disability Insurance is called the elimination period before benefits begin . You can design the waiting period from 30 days to a year , but the most popular is 90 days . Most Americans have 90 days of cash reserves stored up to pay domestic household expenses . Matching your cash reserves with the waiting period is a good way to determine how long the waiting period should be .
Long Term Disability Insurance will start paying the benefit to the disabled employee after the waiting period -LRB- elimination period -RRB- has been satisfied . The most common elimination period chosen for Long Term Disability Insurance is 3 months , but it can be shorter or longer . The shorter the elimination period , the lower the premium . The countdown for the waiting period usually starts on the day of the injury or illness , but if a minor illness has developed into a major one , the elimination period might not start to be satisfied until that progression has taken place . Each policy will spell out that criteria to review ahead of time .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
I believe by `` waiting period '' you are asking about the elimination period . Yes all disability policies have some sort of waiting period upon your first diagnosis of a medical disability . Short term disability insurance plans have a relatively short elimination period and can be as short as one day . Long term disability plans vary from 30 days to 360 days before benefits begin to pay .
Short Term Disability is used to replace approx 40-70 % of your salary if disabled for a `` short '' period of time . Most short term disabilities last from 3-6 months , although the cap can be as high as two years . The coverage may kick in as soon as the disability is determined , or there may be a waiting period . If purchasing your own policy , the higher the premium you pay , the shorter the waiting period . Some of the uses for short term disability are partial income replacement in case of pregnancy , muscle strains , broken bones , pneumonia , heart attack , or chemotherapy treatments .
Long term disability insurance generally has a waiting period or `` elimination '' period that needs to be satisfied before benefits are generated . If you are addressing individual disability insurance , one of the most popular waiting periods is 90 days . Most Americans have about 90 days in cash reserves , so establishing your cash reserves will help you determine you disability elimination period .
The answer will depend upon whether you are talking about group health insurance or individual health insurance . Employers have a certain degree of flexibility in establishing a waiting period before a new hire can become eligible to enroll in the company 's group plan . Under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- now in effect this waiting period should not exceed 90 calendar days from your date of hire . So , this establishes a maximum waiting period under an employer based plan but the employer can choose to have a shorter waiting period . If you are applying for individual health insurance during the open enrollment period or following a change of life status event it will depend upon when you have submitted your enrollment form . If your enrollment form is received on or before the 15th of the month your coverage should go into effect on the first of the next month -LRB- e.g. - February 10 submission would be for a March 1st effective date -RRB- . If your enrollment form is received after the 15th of the month your coverage would become effective on the first of the following month -LRB- e.g. - February 18th submission would be for an April 1st effective date -RRB- .
The waiting period , also known as the elimination period , varies from plan to plan . For short term disability insurance , the common elimination periods are 7 and 14 days . For long term disability insurance , the most favorable ep is 90 days , but some policies are written with 180 or even 365 eps . The longer eps are usually to offset the cost as it 's cheaper when the waiting period is longer .
The elimination period for Disability Insurance is the waiting period between the time the disability occurs , and the time the insurance benefit begins to be paid . The elimination period is one of the variables of a Disability Insurance policy that can be adjusted to lower premiums -LRB- by making the elimination period longer -RRB- . If the applicant has very little savings on hand , they may want to pay more premium and buy a policy with a shorter elimination period .
Disability Insurance is intended to provide coverage in the event of a disability that prohibits a person from being able to work . The understanding for this type of policy is that a certain amount of time must elapse to prove disability . That is called the waiting period . It is expected that the insured will cover their own expenses until the waiting period has expired and benefits can begin .
I believe you are asking when the disability insurance benefits begin . All disability policies have a waiting period called the elimination period . This can be found on the declaration page in your policy . The elimination period is the period of time between a medical diagnosis of the disability and when benefits begin to pay to the insured . The most common elimination periods are 30-60-90-180-360 days .
What 's nice about short term disability insurance is that it has a shorter elimination period . That means , rather than waiting 90 days for your policy to pay you benefits -LRB- which is common with long term disability insurance -RRB- , you may only have to wait 7 or 14 days before you can collect a benefit . The benefit period wo n't be as long though , but for things like pregnancy or a broken leg , that 's all you 'll need .
Disability insurance is not really meant to be an `` investment '' . Disability insurance is meant to protect your most valuable asset , your ability to earn a living . Unless you are independently wealthy or have built a residual income stream that pays you enough money to live the rest of your life without any effort on your part , you need disability insurance . Most disability policies have limits up to 70 % of your monthly income in case of an injury or illness so severe you can no longer work . There are a lot of moving parts to purchasing a good disability policy such as waiting periods , elimination periods , benefit periods , both health and financial underwriting and it can be very confusing to the novice . I recommend using an experienced disability insurance broker who can help you navigate this maze of coverage . Never buy insurance based on price , it is about having the right product at the best price . Good luck !
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Does A Health Insurance Statement Look Like ?
A health insurance statement will have many looks , since each insurer has a different way of billing and contacting their customers . If it is a bill for past services , it will show the amount that is owed , the date of treatment , a description of treatment and any Network discounts applied to the bill . And there will be other items on the statement as well .
There is no accessible centralized database but there are ways to track down lost life insurance policies . Start by looking through all paperwork , receipts , annual statements , bank statements , checkbooks , calendars , address books , etc. . In the latter , look for , and contact , professional advisers e.g. life insurance , tax , legal , financial adviser or planner . Check the mail for the coming months for billing statements . Ask companies providing home , auto , health or other insurance coverage if life insurance was also held there . Contact your state 's insurance department and check the website for resources for locating lost policies . Some states have set up policy locator services . Also check the state 's unclaimed property databases . The MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- is also a way to locate policies issued since 1996 from the insurance companies who are MIB members . There are also a few businesses who charge a fee to do this research for you .
This question often comes up when a family member dies and the policies are believed to exist but can not be located . There is no centralized database but there are ways to track down lost life insurance policies . Start by looking through all paperwork , receipts , annual statements , bank statements , checkbooks , calendars , address books , etc. . In the latter , look for , and contact , professional advisers e.g. life insurance , tax , legal , financial adviser or planner . Check the mail for the coming months for billing statements . Ask companies providing home , auto , health or other insurance coverage if life insurance was also held there . Contact your state 's insurance department and check the website for resources for locating lost policies . Some states have set up policy locator services . Also check the state 's unclaimed property databases . The MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- is also a way to locate policies issued since 1996 from the insurance companies who are MIB members . There are also a few businesses who charge a fee to do this research for you .
Some other places to look other than those places that Jerry Vanderzanden mentioned in his answer would be on the deceased persons pay stub . Some times an insured may buy a `` Voluntary Life '' plan through work and you may be able to find mention of the company or policy number on his or her pay statement . Many credit card companies and banks offer accidental death type policies for their customers , so those statements may be a good place to look , also safety deposit boxes are favorite hiding places for life policies .
Depends on the type of program you 're applying for . For non-medical policies - it can take as little as 48 hours or up to about 2 weeks -LRB- depends on whether they need to get a doctor 's statement -LRB- called an APS - attending physician 's statement -RRB- , waiting on the completion of a phone interview , etc. , if applicable -RRB- . For traditional programs -LRB- one 's that include an exam -RRB- - it typically takes about 4-6 weeks to complete the underwriting process . This is due to the amount of time it takes to process the lab work -LRB- blood tests , urine tests , ekg , etc. -RRB- , get the doctor 's statement -LRB- APS -RRB- , and for the carrier to review the file . If the carrier is having a difficult time trying to track down the doctor 's statement , they 're backed up case-load wise , or they need to get clarification on certain items , it may take a little longer . Even though it takes about 4-6 weeks on average for these programs , it 's helpful to allow 6-8 weeks for it to wrap up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Depends on the type of program you 're applying for . For non-medical policies - it can take as little as 48 hours or up to about 2 weeks -LRB- depends on whether they need to get a doctor 's statement -LRB- called an APS - attending physician 's statement -RRB- , waiting on the completion of a phone interview , etc. , if applicable -RRB- . For traditional programs -LRB- one 's that include an exam -RRB- - it typically takes about 4-6 weeks to complete the underwriting process . This is due to the amount of time it takes to process the lab work -LRB- blood tests , urine tests , ekg , etc. -RRB- , get the doctor 's statement -LRB- APS -RRB- , and for the carrier to review the file . If the carrier is having a difficult time trying to track down the doctor 's statement , they 're backed up case-load wise , or they need to get clarification on certain items , it may take a little longer . Even though it takes about 4-6 weeks on average for these programs , it 's helpful to allow 6-8 weeks for it to wrap up . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Depends on the type of program you 're applying for . For non-medical policies - it can take as little as 48 hours or up to about 2 weeks -LRB- depends on whether they need to get a doctor 's statement -LRB- called an APS - attending physician 's statement -RRB- , waiting on the completion of a phone interview , etc. , if applicable -RRB- . For traditional programs -LRB- one 's that include an exam -RRB- - it typically takes about 4-6 weeks to complete the underwriting process . This is due to the amount of time it takes to process the lab work -LRB- blood tests , urine tests , ekg , etc. -RRB- , get the doctor 's statement -LRB- APS -RRB- , and for the carrier to review the file . If the carrier is having a difficult time trying to track down the doctor 's statement , they 're backed up case-load wise , or they need to get clarification on certain items , it may take a little longer . Even though it takes about 4-6 weeks on average for these programs , it 's helpful to allow 6-8 weeks for it to wrap up .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
A health insurance statement will have many looks , since each insurer has a different way of billing and contacting their customers . If it is a bill for past services , it will show the amount that is owed , the date of treatment , a description of treatment and any Network discounts applied to the bill . And there will be other items on the statement as well .
It depends on what you call a good deal . If you are looking at starting a life insurance policy on your child to protect them incase of premature death or to guarantee options to buy more life insurance in the future , then Gerber is a nice policy . But with that being said I have to say that I strongly disagree with their latest run of TV commercials that promote buying their life insurance policy as a way to fund your child college . Again in my opinion when you look at the premium that you are paying , how long it will be paid and the cash value that is available when your child is ready to go to college , that statement borders on the line of lying . Funding college no , funding some college books is more like it . Everything really comes down to what are you buying the insurance policy for .
There is no rule for this other than to say that we recommend a life insurance policy review at least every three years or annually in some circumstances . Thus , you would need to retain the annual statements for at least three years or longer . Sometimes annual statements are all the family ends up finding in the event of a lost policy so the more of those statements you keep , the better .
Ironically , the purpose of a disclosure statement in life insurance policies is , partly , to describe the purpose and importance of the disclosure . The disclosure statement will state what the policy is intended to do , and what the policyholder 's responsibilities are . It will outline the coverage , cost , personal information of the insured , source of the insurance , and certification and maintenance of the policy .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
APS means Attending Physician Statement . It really is n't a statement about your health from your doctor is usually is your chart notes for a period of time , like last 5 years or 10 years depending on the company . An APS on average nationally takes about 30 days to complete , so add that time into your wait to hear back from the insurance carrier as most policies take around 5-9 weeks to complete these days .
Yes , but it is a matter of timing . You are asking this question at the end of July , 2014 . If you are looking for individual health insurance and you somehow missed the first ObamaCare open enrollment period that ended on March 31st , 2014 then you are probably out of luck until the next open enrollment period beginning on November 15th for an effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . As an individual you no longer have the freedom of being able to purchase individual health insurance whenever you feel like it . That is one of the tradeoffs involved with ObamaCare doing away with medical underwriting , adjusting rates for risk , applying pre-existing condition limitations or exclusions , or denying coverage . There are some exceptions to my statement above . These are called `` Change of Life Status Events '' with marriage , divorce , having a child , and losing your group health insurance coverage being common examples . If you are getting a new job and will be becoming eligible for coverage under your new employer 's group health insurance plan then you will become eligible for health insurance coverage at the end of your employer 's probationary/waiting period . That time period can vary from employer to employer and you should be or have been advised by the HR department or business owner as to what that time period is . Under the terms of the health care reform law your waiting period should be no longer than 90 calendar days from your date of hire .
Are you kidding me ? You can say that for all individuals from all income levels , with different concerns that a term policy or a spousal trust would always be a better option ? First of all anyone who qualifies any insurance policy structuring by referencing the total population of current and potential policy holders and does not give you a mixed message then they do not fully understand or do not care to fully answer the question as to the benefits or drawbacks of a policy -LRB- assuming that they are not basing their statement in the fact that the policy structuring will be eliminated/or significantly compromised by federal regulations -RRB- . First of all I am including Indexed Universal Life under the whole life product line , some professionals like to clearly separate the different options , which can serve a purpose . However I will assume a limited working knowledge of life insurance structuring regarding the average consumer who would be asking this as the first question that they would like to address once they take a seat in ones office . That being said most people who have not been educated or taught themselves the life insurance market are only familiar with Term and Whole . At very least it is a good place to start as those looking for final expense plans have no interest and are not going to benefit from hearing about all of the whole life policy structurings , and a individual who is trying to figure out how they can reduce estate taxes , avoid taxes for surpassing federal and possible state gifting limits they do n't have any interest in term life and are probably going to be using life insurance along with setting up a or several trusts to help them meet their need . If you already have a standard whole life policy and your goal when purchasing the policy was maximizing distributions to beneficiaries than I would say that the majority of policy holders that fit into that criteria would be best off leveraging the equity in their policy to meet their `` borrowing '' needs . This is also assuming that the policy has been in force long enough to establish a respectable cash value -LRB- depending on the policy , the premiums paid and the interest rates a rough estimate would be 8 years from the policy issue before you would consider borrowing from the policy except for in a emergency -RRB- . Basically the most efficient way to borrow from such a policy would be using the cash value in the policy as collateral -LRB- as you would a car or a house -RRB- on a bank loan . This will give you the most options to shop around for the best interest rates and will simplify the entire process for you . Right now Indexed Universal Life policies are dominating the market . They can be a little more complex and confusing . However they are seeing such widespread growth because of their interest rate structuring , and because they serve as fantastic duel purpose policies . By purchasing a policy with a face amount that is appropriate for your needs but far less then you had initially had in mind the policy will accumulate a significant cash value that can be used as a college fund , a retirement fund , or many other situations . One would generally want to plan on contributing to the policy for a specific amount of time before they will be requiring the distributions . But the amount of time you will want to give the policy to grow the cash value will depend on your needs , if you want to use if to provide a extra $ 40,000 annually to supplement your post retirement stream financial goals for 20 years then it will probably have to grow for about 25 years . If on the other hand you are just looking to find the most beneficial way to structure a college fund that will only be making distributions for 4-6 years then one can achieve this in a far smaller time frame , by the way I personally have funded my daughters higher expense costs from a IUL policy and I think that they are very often the best option , a professional with your best interest motivating their actions will always look into the options run calculations and then present you with your options and empirically show evidence that supports their value statement and product comparison . That 's all I am going to say except if one does not believe in cash value policies then what do they purpose as a better way to maximize transfers of wealth . - Christopher J. Lawrence Christopher@Lawrence-Financial-Consulting.com
In 20 years I have never heard of that . The only reason I can see is that after underwriting they discovered a falsity on the application , however they typically only have 2 years after policy issuance to determine that . Unless you have missed premium payments or purchased a policy with variable premiums and returns and have underfunded the policy it would be considered a lapse not being dropped . You would have received mailings as well as annual statements that indicated how long the policy would remain in force if you continue to pay the premiums you were paying . My suggestion is to get a professional agent to review your policy . You need to look at the original illustration that was provided to you when you first purchased the policy as well as any statements that the company provided you over the years . This way you can determine if premium payments were insufficient to cover the expenses .
Assuming youre not addressing individual retirement plans like IRAs and SEPs , your annual statement should include your 408 -LRB- b -RRB- -LRB- 2 -RRB- fees -LRB- including admin fees -RRB- and you compliance statement 404 -LRB- c -RRB- which should cite your administrator who has fiduciary responsibilities for your plan . You also should be able to find out who is the fiduciary of your plan through your companys human resource department
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
This has been a controversial area for several years as I presume you are asking about how to reimburse employees for the cost of individual health insurance . There had been a lot of activity which was embraced by a number of employers in past years to reimburse their employees for the cost of individual health insurance through the use of a Health Reimbursement Account -LRB- HRA -RRB- and making it a deductible business expense no different than an employer contribution to a group health insurance plan . In early 2013 the DOL and IRS issued statements that virtually every benefits professional recognized as being definitive in stating that this practice was not allowed . If an employer does not want to offer a group health insurance plan but wants to assist their employees in purchasing individual health insurance then the only practical way to do this appears to be by grossing up their pay by some amount . Of course , this is no different than giving the employees a pay raise from a tax perspective because that is exactly what you are doing . Also , this well intentioned action by the employer may have the unintended consequence of reducing or eliminating the amount of the Advanced Premium Tax subsidy that the employees might qualify for in the government health insurance marketplaces . But it is now clear than any employer support for employees purchasing their own health insurance can only be done on a post-tax basis . Depending upon a given group 's circumstances this may be a viable option to consider and is being done by some employers . This is an approach that needs to be handled with care and you should seek guidance regarding the applicability of this approach to your company 's specific situation . If you would like to learn more please feel free to contact me .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Do You Buy Life Insurance ?
The first step to buying life insurance is finding someone to sell it to you . This can be done by searching on the internet for `` instant life insurance quotes '' or `` diabetes life insurance '' or whatever search term fits your situation . Then pick the one that gives you a good price and appears to have a good reputation as evidenced by testimonials , being part of the BBB , etc. . OR you can call a local agent or agency . Once you visit with your agent and narrow down what policy you want to apply for , you fill out an application , sign and submit it . This can be done digitally or by a wet signature . The application then goes to the life insurance company for review . If you are getting a policy that does not require an exam , the policy may go into effect within as little as an hour or as long as a month . If you are applying for a medically underwritten policy , you will be contacted by a local paramed exam company to schedule a short exam done in your home or place of your choice . They will collect a blood sample , urine sample , blood pressure , etc , and ask health questions . The life insurance company may also order medical records from your physician -LRB- s -RRB- . When all the requirements are in and the underwriter has reviewed it all , he/she will approve your policy at the rating that is warranted based on your medical and other information . They will notify your agent , who will then notify you . Payment may be done at the time the application is done , at the time the policy is approved , or after you receive the policy in the mail and you have looked it over and decided to keep it .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
If you are considering term insurance please ask yourself these questions . How old am I ? If I buy 20 year term now how old will I be when I have to buy another policy ? Does it meet your needs to buy term life considering the objective of the policy ? The purpose of term has always been to allow the purchaser to invest the difference between the cost of term life and permanent coverage . How much are you `` investing '' now ? Every policy you have means you are paying `` administrative costs '' for that policy . What if you have one good size permanent policy purchased at your current age to meet all your life insurance needs or can you buy a term life and then be able to meet your financial objectives and not have to buy another life insurance policy ? Finally , you need to have a personal advisor that puts your needs first and has the integrity to make recommendations based on your TOTAL financial plan and not some life insurance agent pedaling life insurance
I will answer this question as a dad . First , take the advice of one of the richest men in the world , Warren Buffet . His advice Rule 1 `` do n't lose '' . Rule 2 `` refer to rule 1 '' . So cover your ass-etts first , buy yourself some decent insurance . if a calamity befalls you , you will not be financially out of the game . Somebody will suffer the calamity . It may be you . 1 . For free life insurance advice , go to www.lfehappens.org and figure out how much you need now . Then buy it . Today . You are not bulletproof . You likely have a friend your age that has died . No second chance . 2 . Car insurance . Since the average SUV you might hit costs lots more than the minimum coverages , do n't get minimum liability coverage . If you hit someone , and have less coverage than what you hit , you may end up paying for the rest of the SUV you hit out of pocket . While I am on it , buy a car you can afford to lose . Pay cash if you can . Cars are just the cost of getting to work . By paying cash , you can save 4,000 a year or more . A nice little pile . Remember : We fly around all day in 30 year old airliners . Airlines maintain their planes meticulously . Maintain your vehicle and it will last . Fall in love with your spouse and your children , not your car . 3 . Furniture , clothes , and other things do not go up in value . Pay cash for items that do not go up in value . If you ca n't pay cash , you ca n't afford it . Goodwill is open in every city . They always have some nice things . 4 . You do not need cable or Satellite . Netflix is 1/10th the cost . Save 1000.00 a year . 5 . Pack a lunch . You can go on a nice vacation with the 2,500.00 or so you will save over the year by not buying a 10.00 lunch . 6 . Do you really need the latest cell phone and unlimited data plan ? No , I did n't think so . 7 . Little piles make big piles . Only when you have saved something can you plan for retirement . The easiest way to make a good retirement possible is to cover your losses , and spend less . Once you have saved your backside risk and saved some capital , how you allocate your funds is less important than the discipline to do it . What gets watched grows in your life . Keep track of your money , using www.mint.com or some other software , and it will grow . when you have big piles , you will by then have the knowledge of how to keep the money working . Let me say it again . Little piles make big piles . Be disciplined . Do so , and you will be comfortable in retirement . I have faith in you . - dad
You want to find the structure that is going to be the most suitable to meet the needs you want to have covered . There 's a number of factors that you should think about when buying life insurance including : 1 -RRB- Why do you need the coverage ? 2 -RRB- How long do you need it ? 3 -RRB- What risk class do you qualify for ? -LRB- this is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Does the policy provide full coverage -LRB- payout whether death occurs by illness or injury - if you die by illness and you only have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What is the company 's financial rating ? - this is a big point when you 're looking at permanent coverage . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Brokers can help you through the entire process from start to finish . This includes helping you determine how much coverage is suitable to what you need the coverage for and how long you should have it in place for through an insurance needs analysis , provide quotes from multiple carriers and compare the options with you , track the application while it 's in underwriting and provide assistance on future needs as well . If you 'd like assistance in buying a life insurance policy , send me a message - my contact information is provided on my profile . I do not charge fees for my input and can walk you through the entire process of securing a policy .
Do you know what you want ? Are you sure ? A good agent can help answer all your questions and assist you in knowing how and what to decide . That is a major functions of a quality Life Insurance Agent . They are trained to gather the facts from you and make recommendations for you to select from . Do you want Whole Life or Term ? Do you know the difference ? How much coverage do you need ? Do you really know how to determine that ? How do you select beneficiaries ? If they are minors do you know how to ensure the money goes to them and not to Probate Court ? These are the types of things I can help you with .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
There are different schools of thought on how long you need life insurance . Some believe that you only need life insurance until you save up enough so that your dependents would do OK , even if your died prematurely . That philosophy is often called , `` buy Term , invest the rest . '' Those who like this idea tend to buy shorter terms and pay as little as possible for their life insurance , with the hopes that by the time their Term policy ends , they will not need to buy more . Some choose the age of retirement as their cutoff point for owning life insurance , with the intention of having all debts paid off and money for retirement saved up by then . On the opposite side of the fence are those who would use life insurance for a lot of their supplemental income and security in later life , and thus only buy permanent policies . Not only do they spend more on premiums than those who buy Term only , but they may even increase their premiums so that their policies are paid up by the time they retire . Many people fall somewhere in between . They buy what is most cost effective for each particular need . E.g. . They may buy Term for the bigger expenses in their lives , such as getting their kids raised . And they might buy a smaller Whole or Universal Life policy for their final expense needs . Then try to diversify their investments as is prudent at each stage of their lives , and in accordance with the economy , and products offered at that time .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
How much disbility insurance should you buy ? A combination of the most you can get and what you can afford . If you already have group insurance in place , usually you can only buy up to 70 % of yourwagescombined between individual and group . If group is not in place you can buy individual coverage up to 70 % and combine with group later to actually insure more than 100 % of your income . The hard part with how much coverage should you buy is how much will it cost ? Getting the full level of coverage can be pretty hefty as far as premium goes .
Why should you buy life insurance ? Maybe you should n't . If no one depends on you for income , if you will have no final expenses to bury or cremate you , if you do n't care about the person that might be stuck paying off your debt , then , do n't buy life insurance . Also , people that do not believe in insurance should n't buy it . In spite of the fact that owning an insurance policy is not a religious commitment , buying it might disrupt their value system and enrich an already wealthy insurance agent or insurance company . On the other hand , if you do care about anything other than yourself at all , you should consider buying it . Even a small face amount of life insurance is better than having none . It might provide you with some peace of mind as the gurney you are bleeding to death on is being rolled into the surgical unit .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Yes you can apply for life insurance online . The life insurance industry is going through a very trying transition right now . The average career life insurance agent right now is over 50 years of age and the total number of agents is quickly declining . This is happening because more people like you are looking for life insurance online . The important thing for anyone who is a just starting the life insurance process to consider is that your buying experience will certainly be very different if you buy life insurance online versus contacting a local agent . Not better or worse , but different . Thinking about how you prefer to do business may help you decide which route to take . Are you part of the connected generation ? If your average day includes texting and Skype or FaceTime you will be perfectly comfortable buying your life insurance online . Do n't be concerned that you will be stuck with some impersonal call center . There are plenty of great online insurance agents that provide personal service . The only difference between them and your local agent is that your communication will be via your smart phone , not in person . If you 're not into the latest technology and you feel that personal interaction requires a handshake , you probably wo n't be comfortable getting life insurance online . You may find the process cold and impersonal . Do n't worry . Even though they 're getting older , there are plenty of great local life insurance agents that will give you advice and personal service your way . Many of them still make house calls and transact business over your kitchen table . The most important thing is not where you get life insurance , it 's that you do get life insurance . Good luck to you whichever route you choose :-RRB-
Pure Term Life insurance has premiums that increase every year as you get older . Most people do n't like a premium that goes up every year so they decide how long they need the insurance and level out the premiums by buying level premium term . When you do this you are paying extra in the earlier years in order to level out the premium in the later years of your level premium period . That is why 1-year term is much cheaper than 20-year term . When you buy term life insurance , you should determine how long you want the premium to be level and buy it for that length . For instance if your mortgage is paid off in 18-more years , you should buy a 20-year level term policy if the mortgage payoff is the reason for the insurance .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
What is the best Whole Life Policy ? While there is no direct answer to this , the best answer is whatever policy will best protect your family . There are different types of whole life policies . The most common is ordinary whole life , also called `` straight Life '' or `` Permanent '' -LRB- cash value -RRB- Insurance . You pay a level premium for the rest of your life , as long as you are making your monthly premiums . The premium never increases and your policy accumulates cash value . How much life insurance -LRB- death benefit -RRB- will you need ? That determines on a number of factors such as : Do you have any children/grandchildren you want to leave money to ? How much of your income does your spouse depend on ? Who depends on you financially ? How much debt do you owe ? Do you want to leave money to your favorite charity ? You want to make sure you buy enough life insurance to cover your financial obligations if an unexpected or untimely death occurs . It is also important your premium fit 's within your budget . Because if you ca n't afford it , it is n't any good for you or your family . An insurance agent is the best person to get with to compare the different types of life insurance and find a policy that best suits your situation . I work with many top insurance carriers with the most competitive rates . I 'll do the shopping for you ! Thank you & Be Well , Mendy Douglas www.iflretirement.com/mendy-douglas/
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Much Is Car Insurance For A Porsche Boxster ?
The cost of auto insurance coverage for any vehicle or driver can vary greatly . Things that effect your auto insurance rates are geographical location , vehicle , age -LRB- s -RRB- of driver -LRB- s -RRB- , type of coverage desired , motor vehicle record of all drivers , credit rating of all drivers , and more . Contact a local agent to get a quote . A quote cost nothing but will let you know where your rate would be .
Great question ! Insurance companies use a great number of variables in determining your rate . The make , model and year of your car , for example . A new Porsche will cost more to insure than a 2005 Escort , for example . Where you live , the rate of uninsured motorists , and the auto theft rate are also factors they consider . Your credit rating can also be a factor , by the way . Then you get into the profitability of the company and their fees . And then to the coverage that you desire , your driving record , and your age . All of those factors help determine the rate that you will pay . If you shop around , you will find there can be big differences in those rates . If you need more information , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help ! thanks for asking !
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
I suggest a number of different approaches . How much coverage would you want the person to carry if they injured you or your family or damaged your property in a car accident ? If you cause an accident , injure family members riding with you and are from a state permitting intra-family suits , how much coverage would you want available to pay for their injuries ? And of course , how much do you stand to lose ? What is your net worth , the value of your earning power , and/or the value of your personal integrity ? None of these methods will lead you to the perfect limit but they are the considerations I would suggest one think about when selecting the appropriate amount of insurance . In addition , I always suggest your uninsured/under-insured motorists coverage -LRB- the one that covers you , your family and possibly the passengers in your car in case the other car is not insured or poorly insured -RRB- be consistent with the coverage you carry in case you hurt someone else . However if none of these considerations apply , one must always be aware of the minimum limits required by most state laws .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
This depends upon what you mean by `` Business Car Insurance . '' If you are asking about insuring an automobile with a business auto policy , those are typically more expensive than a personal auto policy . If you are asking about insuring a company car , then that should be handled by the business providing you the automobile . The company should look into endorsements covering other drivers , in case your family members living in the house use your company car . If you are asking how much it costs to insure a company car on your personal auto policy this is not really an option because you do not have a valid insurable interest in the car . What I mean by this is the company owns the car and is getting a benefit from letting you use it , so your only interest is not paying for a car , which is not an insurable interest on your part . I hope this helps !
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
How much is for car insurance ? Hmmm . What is this person attempting to ask ? How many people like auto insurance ? No , I think they mean something else . How much does it cost ? Yes , that 's probably it . Rates vary , depending on your age , location , driving record and vehicle . As experienced brokers , we 're always happy to shop for the best rates and show you the lowest prices . LIVE -LRB- 2014/2015 -RRB- Answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier US car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites where consumers find the lowest available rates .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Long Does It Take To Collect A Life Insurance Payment ?
How long does it take to collect proceeds from a life policy ? Not all that long . Most of the time is spent getting the information together . You are going to need a certified copy of the certificate of death . Actually you should have 5 or 6 made as you will need them for other things besides insurance . When you have the paperwork together and submit , usually it does n't take long for payment to be sent to the beneficiaries . Usually about 5 working days or so with the companies I have worked with . You also will receive interest on the money held while the paperwork is being put together as part of the claim .
Once the life insurance company has been notified of the death , a claim form must be filled out and returned to the life insurance company with a death certificate . Getting the death certificate is sometimes the longest part of the process . Once the insurance company receives the death claim form and death certificate , they usually pay the death benefit within weeks .
How long does it take to collect proceeds from a life policy ? Not all that long . Most of the time is spent getting the information together . You are going to need a certified copy of the certificate of death . Actually you should have 5 or 6 made as you will need them for other things besides insurance . When you have the paperwork together and submit , usually it does n't take long for payment to be sent to the beneficiaries . Usually about 5 working days or so with the companies I have worked with . You also will receive interest on the money held while the paperwork is being put together as part of the claim .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
That is a great question ! The deal is that it really boils down to how well you manage your money , in my opinion . The sales pitch for a flexible premium policy is that you have the ability to be `` flexible '' with your payments - you might pay a little more than the premium , skip a payment entirely , or overpay , as you see fit . If you are the type of person that is very closely watching your expenditures , and keeps a sharp eye on your investments , then this policy type can be potentially helpful in the convenience it offers . But ... If you are like the overwhelming majority of Americans -LRB- 77 % - an unbelievable 77 % !! -RRB- that live paycheck to paycheck , part of the 66 % without adequate -LRB- or any -RRB- savings , or the 35 % with a bill currently in collections , this may not be a good thing . The Bible tells us that while `` All things are permissible , not all things are good . '' That is solid wisdom , in this case . The temptation here is to believe that the `` flexibility '' offered here provides you with more wiggle room in payments . While that is true to some degree , the truth is that there is a bottom line cost that has to be regularly covered or the policy goes under and lapses . Once it does , everything that you 've paid into it goes under also . Sadly , what happens to those who have problems with cash flow and/or money management is that they make payments that cover those costs for a while , but slowly start underpaying or skipping payments , and the result is that the minimum premium payment goes up , it becomes unaffordable , more payments are underpaid or missed , and the policy goes down like the Titanic , taking all your money with it . So it is generally my opinion and recommendation that having a single , set premium payment policy is generally a safer bet . If the payment is budgeted for , and prioritized , there is far less chance of the policy falling behind and lapsing . The offer of flexible payments is definitely tantalizing , but then again , most of the things that are bad for us generally are ... Bottom line ? If you are good with your money and keep an eye on your financial matters , there are times when having that flexibility can be helpful . If you feel that money management may be an area of opportunity for you , perhaps the stability of the fixed premium policy would be a safer choice . I hope that helps , if you have any questions , please do not hesitate to inbox me , okay ? Thank you very much for asking !
Life Insurance underwriting takes as long as it takes the life insurance underwriter to collect all the data needed to approve your policy . If you apply for a policy that does not need any exam or medical records , the process may take less than 24 hours . If they do not require an exam but can order medical records , it will take as long as it takes you or your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- to provide those records . If they require an exam , you will not be approved until at least 3 days after you take the exam . In other words , the faster you and your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- respond to the underwriter 's requests , the shorter the time it generally takes for your policy to be approved . However , things can get held up if life insurance companies get behind , the paramed examiner will not work with you to set up your exam , your doctor 's office is slow to provide your medical records to the life insurance company , and/or additional medical records must be ordered weeks or months into the process . Above all , a good Case Manager who regularly communicates with you and the insurance company can shave time off the underwriting process . Using an agency that has great customer service may not only help speed things up , it may be the key to getting your life insurance put into effect , period .
You pay for long term insurance by sending the insurance company a check every month , three months , six months or annually . The payment can be paid electronically through a checking account and there may be insurers that bill you directly . Each carrier is different so you can ask your full-time broker to explain the billing methods of the companies . Regarding how long you pay , it depends how long you want coverage . Until you are collecting on a claim , you would have to pay premiums .
Can you collect disability and unemployment insurance at the same time ? Yes , depending on who owns the disability policy . For a group plan offered through your employer the answer would be no . For an individual policy the possibility exists that you could collect from both . Personally I have never collected unemployment so I do n't know if they even ask about disability insurance . They may and collecting disability insurance might reduce unemployment benefits . You may have to look how things work in the state you live in .
Generally , Homeowners insurance is paid at the inception of the policy . As you can imagine , an insurance company does n't like to provide coverage without payment . You can pay your premiums all at once or in payments that can be as often as monthly , but you 'll always be paying ahead . The insurance company wo n't usually let you get behind . If your insurance is paid through your mortgage company escrow , they will pay the entire premium and then collect a portion from you every month . They 'll repeat this every year . They can do this because you usually have to pay your first year up front . Then , they 're collecting for next year .
No , Disability Insurance is not the same as Long Term Care Insurance . Disability Insurance provides a benefit if you are unable to work at your job due to illness or injury . Long Term Care Insurance provides a benefit if you are unable to perform some ADL 's for an extended period of time . With LTCI , it does not matter if you have a job or not . In fact , most people are not employed when they collect Long Term Care benefits , because it takes significant impairment to trigger the payments . On the other hand , you can not get DI unless you are employed and receive a paycheck . If you have a same occupation feature on your Disability Insurance policy , it will pay you a percent of your income even if you could work at a lower paying job .
If you are asking how do you qualify to obtain a Disability Insurance policy , the answer is that you must have an income , you must fill out an application that goes through underwriting just like Life Insurance does , and then you must be approved medically . If you are asking how do you qualify to collect a Disability Insurance benefit , you must have a disability that is not excluded from your policy and you must have waiting the length of time -LRB- elimination period -RRB- required to start collecting it .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
Insurable interest is what ensures that someone can not take a life insurance policy on you with the purpose of making money on your death . It is insurance fraud to take out a policy on an older or terminally ill person just to collect money on their death ; or even worse , to kill someone for the purpose of collecting their life insurance . In order to prevent fraud and to protect their policyholders , all life insurance policies use some measure of insurable interest .
Technically , no . Medicare was designed to help the elderly pay for acute sickness and accidents from whichone can heal relatively quickly . It does not cover chronic illness or prolonged rehabilitation from an accident . However , Medicare will provide payment of costs for some `` short-term '' recovery for the elderly that are enrolled in Medicare part A & B . There are prequalifications and limitations to what it will pay for , how much it will pay , the type of care it will pay for , and for how long -LRB- maximum of 100 days -RRB- . Payment for long-term care is usually paid out of pocket , or by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . To receive payment for care from the latter , one must be `` impoverished '' as defined by the state that they live in , and they usually must be in a facility -LRB- Medicaid/Medical only pay a few hundred dollars a month of home care -RRB- . The only other solution to the problem of paying for long-term care , either at home or in a facility , is long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- . This sector of the health insurance industry is in a bit of turmoil right now and if you have decided that you want to explore LTCi , make sure that you work with someone that is a specialist in this area . There are an infinite number of designs in coverage which can vary the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- by thousands of dollars a year . Also , be sure that you are working with agents that only work with the best LTCi companies in the industry , those that have strong financials , high ratings , and are committed to the field . The most important thing is to have a plan . Your plan may or may not include LTCi . But , if it does , buy no later than your mid-fifties as the price really starts to climb after that . Dont depend on Medicare for the payment of long-term care costs .
It depends on individual or family circumstance . A better question is how much life insurance is enough ? Remember one reason for Life Insurance is income replacement . Having enough life insurance to ensure a family is protected is usually the best place to start . A term life insurance contract typically provides a large death benefit with a low premium payment . Provide peace of mind knowing your family will be protected then decide if and how much Whole Life Insurance is enough . The term Whole Life means you will be paying premiums your entire , or `` Whole '' life . Having too much Whole Life Insurance might be an issue if the primary breadwinner loses his or her job and can no longer afford making premium payments . This is where Whole Life can be costly . When considering the purchase of Whole Life Insurance it is a long term , risk adverse strategy . Make sure you are able to make premium payments for at least 10 to 12 years regardless of job loss , increase in expenses , etc. . All the risk is transferred to the insurance carrier and the interest crediting provides a guarantee . Plus there is usually a ` dividend ' or return or premium . The only thing the insured needs to do is make sure they make the premium payments . There is no flexibility with these premiums , like Universal Life Insurance . It generally takes a long time to build cash value . For standard products and level premium schedules the break even point for premiums paid equaling cash value accumulation is generally 10-12 years . Always ask your agent questions if you are unsure of how life insurance products work .
Some things to look for in a long term care insurance policy are whether the benefit increases for inflation , whether the amount you collect adds up to a lump sum that you can spend at the rate that you need it , how long the elimination period is , if it has zero elimination period for home health care , and what the triggers are for collecting on it . When going over the policy features , they will be in summary form so you can compare similar features for each one you are considering .
The time it takes to get life insurance is from a few hours , to a few months . If you apply for a No Exam policy with a company that does not order medical records , the processing time is usually a few days to a few weeks . Some are put into effect shortly after applying via phone interview . If you apply for a policy that requires paramed exam and medical records , the amount of time that it takes to go into effect will depend on how soon you take the exam , and how soon your medical records come in . The underwriter usually waits until everything is in before reviewing your case . If at review time , he or she finds that you had seen another doctor , they might order additional records , which causes further delay . It is helpful to list all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years on your application , or else even collect medical records yourself , in order to get your policy in effect ASAP .
Yes - by not impairing your credit score and profile . How can this occur ? When your auto insurance is cancelled or terminated for any reason it may have earned more premium than you paid . Your carrier will bill you for the additionally ` earned premium ' which is a legally collectible debt . If you do not pay this debt , their collection efforts will most likely show up in your credit report and history . Your credit ` profile ' is a significant factor that is considered in securing many things like insurance , financial contracts , loans , apartments , credit , etc. . Paying your debts -LRB- preventing collection activity which will be reported -RRB- definitely improves your credit by preventing it from getting worse . Do whatever you can to keep your credit score and profile as positive as possible .
Some Disability Insurance coverage characteristics are elimination period -LRB- how long you must be disabled before the policy will pay a benefit -RRB- , length of coverage -LRB- how many years it will pay out -RRB- , percent of income replacement -LRB- dollar value of the policy payments -RRB- , and features that determine benefit triggers , amount , and duration . E.g. . An important policy consideration is whether to pay for the `` own occupation '' feature , which will allow you to collect at least a partial benefit if you are unable to perform your OWN job , as opposed to being able to work at ANY job .
Life insurance does not go to the debt of the person who died , unless the life insurance proceeds go to his/her estate . If the money goes to the estate , debt collectors will collect from it . Another way life insurance might go to pay off debt incurred by the Insured , is if the beneficiary was a co-signer for the Insured 's debt -LRB- in community property states , a spouse may need to pay off the debt even if their name was not on the contract -RRB- . If not a co-signer -LRB- or not the surviving spouse in a community property state -RRB- , the beneficiary does not need to pay off the debt of the Insured , unless they want to . If it is the beneficiary who has debts and receives a life insurance death benefit , each state has their own limitations on whether or not debt collectors can come after your life insurance proceeds . This website tells about the debt collection laws from some states : WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can Car Insurance Cover Repairs ?
Car insurance will only cover repairs due to an accident or vandalism . If you want to get coverage for major car insurance repairs , that would be covered by a car warranty . These can be purchased at the time of purchase or at a later time through certain carriers . If you do look into this option , be sure to check the company reviews online and through the Better Business Bureau as there is a great deal of customer dissatisfaction with many of these companies . This would be a warranty and not insurance .
Routine maintenance would not be covered under a standard car insurance policy if that is what you are asking . If you have Comprehensive and Collision coverage on our car policy , then if your car is damaged due to a covered peril , then your policy will provide coverage for the necessary repairs .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
Here is the thing . Insurance claim settlements are intended to pay for the repair of damage caused by a covered loss under the provisions of a policy contract , in this case an car insurance policy . If one receives a settlement and then chooses , for whatever reason not to repair the damage , I have not seen a case where an insurance company is going to be looking for it 's money back . Keep in mind acouple of things , however . If you have a lien or lease on your car , the check will be made payable to BOTH you and the financial institution and they will need to have the car repaired as a condition of your agreement with them . Also , if you happen to have another incident that further damages the same car parts that were damaged previously , the claims professional will be able to tell the older damage from the more recent and will NOT include an amount needed to repair both .
If your car is severely damaged as a result of an accident , for example , your insurance company 's claims professional will assess the amount of damage and the related cost to repair that damage . Since usually the entire extent of such damage can not be completely understood until the car starts to get torn down by the repair shop , a good rule of thumb is that if the inisitial cost to repair is about 70 % of the current book value of the car , more than likely it will bt `` totalled '' . You will be offered a settlement , subject to your deductible andbased upon that current book value.If you have a full replacement value option on a newer car , you may be offered a new car of the same make and model with similar features . If you choose to take the monitary settlement but also want to keep your car , the insurance company rep may stamp the title to indicate the severity of the damage your car had sustained . If that happens , you will have a difficult time selling it later on .
The amount can vary by car and company , but there is a gneral rule of thumb that is a pretty good guide . Usualy , a car is `` totalled '' when the insurance claims adjuster appraises the damage and compares the cost to repair with the `` book value '' of the car . There are various sources to determine the value of a car including , but not limited to , Kelly Blue Bookor the NADA guide as examples . Generally , if the cost to repair is about 70 % of the car 's value , it is likely that the adjuster will recommend categorizing the car as a total loss and will offer you a settlement sum that is in the neighborhood of the repair cost .
-- > Normal 0 If you are comfortable with and trust the insurer of your car , I would approach them or their agent to see what they would suggest you consider to cover your Personal Property and Liability exposures . Hopefully they would offer you coverage consistent with what you have on your car . Most car owners carry insurance to cover the repair of their car if it is damaged in an accident or from some other cause . Insurance on your other personal property should pay you to repair or replace your other personal things if they were damaged . Most car owners carry liability insurance to cover them if they injure someone or damage their property in an accident . Tenant homeowners coverage should provide similar coverage for accidents , which do not involve your car . It makes sense to me to consider one insurance company to cover both exposures . That makes you a more significant customer , you may get better coverage and pricing , you would pay one company and one company would handle your claims . Its not always the best alternative , but it is a good place to start .
No . Auto insurance pays to repair your car if you wreck it . It can also pay to repair other people 's cars if you hit them . To cover funeral expenses you need life insurance of some sort . There are funeral preneed insurance policies for this specific purpose or you can use any death benefit from any life insurance that is in force at the time of your death . Also your funeral planning insurance wo n't pay for your car to be repaired if you wreck it .
There are two different policy types that may pay for repairs : auto insurance , and vehicle warranties . Traditional auto insurance may make claims payments to repair your car after an accident . You may need to file a police report and describe how the accident occurred . Vehicle warranties help pay for repairs caused by manufacturer defects . If your car breaks down the vehicle warranty may pay for the repair . Normal wear and tear is rarely covered -LRB- brake pads , oil changes , tire wear , etc. -RRB- .
Car insurance is important to have for a number of reasons , the big one being it 's generally required by law ! But if that is n't enough to convince you , here are some other reasons it 's important to have car insurance : 1 -RRB- Car insurance protects YOU . Your bodily injury and property damagelimits determine how much the insurance company will pay if you are sued . So , if you have bodily injury limits of 50/100 , your insurance company will only pay $ 50,000 per person and a total of $ 100,000 per accident . If the amount you are sued for is $ 350,000 , guess who is paying the rest ... 2 -RRB- Car Insurance protects your PASSENGERS . What if you are in an accident , the OTHER driver is at fault , but they do n't have any or enough insurance ? That is when your insurance can help again , IF you have uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage . This coverage is similar to the bodily injury/property damage coverage already discussed , but this coverage is to protect you and your passengers in case you are hit by an uninsured or underinsured motorist . 3 -RRB- Car Insurance protects your CAR -LRB- and your wallet -RRB- . If you have Comprehensive -LRB- or Other than Collision -RRB- and Collision coverage on your car , then your car can be repaired and the repairs will be paid for by the insurance company , minus your deductible . This coverage is generally required ONLY if you have a loan or a lease on the vehicle , but it could be a good idea to sit down with your insurance agent and see if your vehicle should have this coverage .
That usually happens when the cost to repair a car is greater than the actual cash value -LRB- ACV -RRB- or `` book value `` of that car . Now , after an accident it may be difficult to determine the final repair total because there is more than likely going to be damage that can only be seen when the car starts getting torn down . As a result , a pretty good rule of thumb is that if the initial repair estimate meets or exceeds 70 % of the value of the car , it is likely that the company will total it at that point .
What does life insurance do ? That is a great question . Auto insurance pays to repair your car , home insurance pays to repair your home , health insurance pays to repair your health . But life insurance does not pay to repair your life . Rather , life insurance pays when death occurs . It 's purpose is to `` repair '' some of the financial damage that is incurred upon the death of a loved one and/or provider . That is not all life insurance does - there are many reasons that people purchase life insurance . But it is the basic purpose .
That is a great question , but it really depends on the company I believe . In my experience , a general rule of thumb to keep in mind is , if the repair estimate provided by the repair shop is in the neighborhood of about 70 % of the `` book value '' of the car , it is likely that the Professional Claims Adjuster will determine the car to be `` totalled '' . Here 's the thing . The estimates are completed as accurately as possible , but really are dependent upon what the technician can see . It is likely that there is damage internally in the structure of the car that can not be seen until the car is broken down . Additional damage will increase the final cost of the repair .
Typically , cars are considered to be totaled when the cost to repair the vehicle is higher than the actual cash value -LRB- ACV -RRB- of the vehicle . Practically speaking , however , it is not always practical to repair a vehicle , even if the cost of repair is less than its ACV . A vehicle worth $ 4,000 requiring $ 3,000 in repairs might be considered totaled by an insurer even though the cost of repair is less than its value before the accident . Insurance companies will typically consider such a vehicle to be a total loss , even though the repairs are only 75 percent of ACV . Visit my website at WEBSITELINK to read about more coverage details and resources .
If by keying you mean scratching the exterior of your car using a key , the answer depends upon the coverage on the policy . If there is comprehensive coverage , the vandalism would be covered subject to the stated deductible . When you file a claim the company will direct you to either secure a quote to repair the damage or ask you to take the car to a specific repair station . Once the cost of repair is fixed they will pay you and the repair shop the agreed upon amount minus the deductible .
If you leave the tailgate up on your Honda Fit and close the garage door on the tailgate that is a comprehensive claim . Your company will direct you to a repair shop . They will repair the car and send a check that requires two signatures , yours and the repair shop . The check will be for the amount of repairs minus your deductible . You will have to pay the deductible to get your car out of the shop .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Is A Tax Qualified Long Term Care Insurance Plan ?
A tax qualified long term care insurance plan is one that is able to have the premiums deducted as a medical expense , and benefits received income tax free . Tax qualified plans have some requirements in regard to triggers and what is offered , that non qualified plans do not . Most long term care insurance sold today is tax qualified -LRB- TQ -RRB- .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
Qualified Long Term Care Insurance -LRB- TQ Long Term Care Insurance -RRB- is long term care insurance that has favorable tax treatment , as determined by the federal government in 1997 . Nearly all long term care policies sold now are qualified plans . It allows your premium and nonreimbursed benefits to be counted as a medical expense on your tax return , and allows you to receive long term care benefits tax free .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
P ayment of long-term care costs from a long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- policy may be taxable if one owns a `` non-qualified '' -LRB- NTQ -RRB- long-term care policy . There may be a few carriers out there that still sell them . However , most carriers exclusively sell only `` tax-qualified '' LTCi -LRB- TQ -RRB- policies , the payouts from which are not subject to being taxed as regular income . If one owns an NTQ policy , it is important to check to see if it was re-categorized TQ by the carrier . There was a period of time in the mid-90s in which coverage design for TQ policies was mandated , but NTQ policies sold prior to that time were allowed to become considered TQ if the policy owner requested it . For some carriers , it was an automatic retro-action . If in doubt , call the carrier 's claims department to determine the tax treatment of an LTCi policy sold before 1998 , even if the title page of the policy in question specifically states that it is `` not tax qualified '' . A definitive answer may not be given - one may be referred to a qualified tax professional for a final determination . Nothing in this answer is intended to be construed as tax advice . For a specific tax situation , go to www.irs.gov or consult with a qualified tax advisor .
A tax qualified long term care insurance plan is one that is able to have the premiums deducted as a medical expense , and benefits received income tax free . Tax qualified plans have some requirements in regard to triggers and what is offered , that non qualified plans do not . Most long term care insurance sold today is tax qualified -LRB- TQ -RRB- .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Payments of long-term care claims by an insurance company are generally not taxable as regular income . However , the policy title page must clearly state that the policy is a `` tax-qualified long-term care insurance policy '' or `` TQ '' . Some carriers still sell `` non-tax-qualified '' long-term care policies -LRB- NTQ -RRB- in which the benefits may be taxable as regular income . The reasoning is that NTQ policies are more generous in qualifying someone to go on claim and that other policy features may provide a broader range of care . Whether those attributes would offset the possible taxation of the benefit is debatable . Most long-term care policies today are `` TQ '' .
The term `` qualified '' should really be `` tax-qualified '' . A tax-qualified long-term care insurance policy -LRB- TQ -RRB- is one that pays out benefits that are not subject -LRB- in most cases -RRB- to income taxation in the year that they are received by the policy owner . -LRB- See `` NOTE '' , below . -RRB- The benefits paid out froma `` non-qualified '' long-term care policy -LRB- NTQ -RRB- may be subject to income tax in the year that they are received . Policies purchased prior to 1998 should be reviewed by a qualified tax advisor for any questions about taxation of benefits . Legislation in 1996 allowed for federal exemption from benefit payout taxationfor policies purchased after a certain datethat metspecific requirements outlined in that legislation . NOTE : LTC insurance policies that payout their benefit as a cash amount -LRB- indemnity policies -RRB- may exceed the government-allowed limit on how much of that benefit can be considered `` tax-qualified '' . If you have one of those types of policies , consult with the carrier 's policy owner service unit to determine how your benefits might be paid out should you qualify for care . Some carriers will only payout a cash benefit up to the federally-mandated limit to avoid triggering a 1099 being sent to the IRS . But , it 's better to check than be surprised .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
The premium and benefits for a Tax Qualified Long Term Care Insurance policy can be deducted on your tax return as a medical expense . TQ Long Term Care Insurance came about in 1997 with the introduction of HIPAA . Tax Qualified policies have a set of guidelines that must be met to be designated as TQ policies . Long Term Care policies purchased before 1997 were grandfathered in , despite not meeting those guidelines . Now , most of the Long Term Care Insurance sold in the US is TQ .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is Health Insurance Included In W2 Wages ?
Many employees have been surprised and concerned to see the value of their employer provided health insurance being reported on their W2 's . This is a requirement of the Affordable Care Act . Under transitional relief guidelines issued , so far only employers who issue 250 or more W2 forms in a calendar year are required to report this information . Eventually all employers who provide health insurance to their employees will be required to report this information on the employee 's W2 . This reporting of the employer paid amount for health insurance is for `` informational '' purposes only and is not being added to the employee 's gross income for income tax purposes . There are some skeptics who see this as a precursor to the eventual tax treatment of employer paid health insurance as employee income at some future date but at this time there is nothing in the Affordable Care Act or any pending legislation that would do this . Where this reporting of employer paid health insurance will become a tax issue will be in 2018 when the `` Cadillac Tax '' portion of the health care law goes into effect . The Cadillac Tax will be a 40 % excise tax imposed on health insurance plans whose annual premium costs exceed $ 10,200 for an individual or $ 27,500 for family coverage -LRB- these amounts will be indexed for inflation -RRB- . So , an employer in 2018 who finds themselves with health plan premium levels exceeding these amounts will be assessed a 40 % tax penalty . While such annual premium amounts may seem unreachable by many persons in 2014 . In some areas of the country , and especially with some very rich collectively bargained plans , total costs are already coming close to these trigger points . When one observes the increases in group health insurance plan costs already triggered by the requirements of the Affordable Care Act in 2014 and applies projected inflationary trend increases over the next few years it becomes much easier to estimate that a larger portion of employer based plans could find themselves subject to this tax penalty . This is one of the underlying motivations for more employers to move to high deductible health insurance plans in order to reduce their premium costs .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
For the W2 employees and perhaps for dedicated 1099 contractors of an S Corporation the employer paying for or towards these employee 's coverage is quite straight forward . From a tax and accounting perspective its gets more complicated for persons who are more than 2 % eligible shareholders in the company . The bottom line is that company paid insurance premiums for more than a 2 % shareholder must be treated as wages to that owner/shareholder . So , the only way the S-Corp can deduct the amount it pays towards owner health insurance as a business expense is by including it as part of the shareholder 's salary . Owner -LRB- s -RRB- health insurance costs can no longer be declared as an insurance expense or employee benefit expense on the S-Corp 's taxes . The effect on the S-Corp 's net income is the same , but this does result in an increase in net taxable income for the owner -LRB- s -RRB- / shareholder -LRB- s -RRB- . It is possible that the owner/shareholder will recapture some of this by deducting it from their Adjusted Gross Income on their Form 1040 . However , the situation can be further complicated by various state laws that may not allow for a one-person corporation to purchase health insurance for the owner and effectively forcing them to purchase individual health insurance coverage that they pay for themselves . And , just to make things even more complicated , if the owner/shareholder or their spouse is eligible to participate in any other subsidized health plan they ca n't take the deduction from Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- AGI -RRB- on their 1040 for medical insurance premiums paid for by the S-Corp . So the answer to your question is sometimes `` Yes '' and sometimes `` No '' because a variety of circumstances can influence the answer . My advice is to seek out an experienced health insurance broker who can determine your specific circumstances and advise you on how to approach them .
Great question ! The only way that it can be considered income is if your employer pays your premium with after tax dollars . Your W2 will show the amount of your share in your wages line , and if so , you can deduct that portion on your Schedule A tax form as a medical expense . If it 's not included , -LRB- and it usually is n't -RRB- your employer has paid with pre-tax dollars , and given you a break on your taxes already . That is the case nearly all of the time . Thanks for asking !
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
Many employees have been surprised and concerned to see the value of their employer provided health insurance being reported on their W2 's . This is a requirement of the Affordable Care Act . Under transitional relief guidelines issued , so far only employers who issue 250 or more W2 forms in a calendar year are required to report this information . Eventually all employers who provide health insurance to their employees will be required to report this information on the employee 's W2 . This reporting of the employer paid amount for health insurance is for `` informational '' purposes only and is not being added to the employee 's gross income for income tax purposes . There are some skeptics who see this as a precursor to the eventual tax treatment of employer paid health insurance as employee income at some future date but at this time there is nothing in the Affordable Care Act or any pending legislation that would do this . Where this reporting of employer paid health insurance will become a tax issue will be in 2018 when the `` Cadillac Tax '' portion of the health care law goes into effect . The Cadillac Tax will be a 40 % excise tax imposed on health insurance plans whose annual premium costs exceed $ 10,200 for an individual or $ 27,500 for family coverage -LRB- these amounts will be indexed for inflation -RRB- . So , an employer in 2018 who finds themselves with health plan premium levels exceeding these amounts will be assessed a 40 % tax penalty . While such annual premium amounts may seem unreachable by many persons in 2014 . In some areas of the country , and especially with some very rich collectively bargained plans , total costs are already coming close to these trigger points . When one observes the increases in group health insurance plan costs already triggered by the requirements of the Affordable Care Act in 2014 and applies projected inflationary trend increases over the next few years it becomes much easier to estimate that a larger portion of employer based plans could find themselves subject to this tax penalty . This is one of the underlying motivations for more employers to move to high deductible health insurance plans in order to reduce their premium costs .
The presence of the amount your employer spends on health insurance on your W2 is a fairly new thing and is part of the new health care laws . So far , that is as far as it goes . Note : the next part is my opinion and should be taken as such . I think the reason your employer 's payment towards your health insurance is being required on the W2 is because it wo n't be too long before it becomes taxable income to the employee . Health insurance -LRB- medical , dental , vision -RRB- I believe is the only benefit where the employer gets to deduct the cost paid -LRB- no taxes paid -RRB- and the employee gets the benefit with no tax consequence either . Most things do n't work that way . The debate over taxation of benefits is not new , it has been going on for years . As the government looks for new sources of tax revenue the days of tax breaks for the employer and employee for health benefits may be fading into the past .
My sick sense of humor almost tempts me to say `` No , real estate agents are specifically excluded from getting health insurance by law '' but I wo n't do that . Yes , you can get health insurance . What you do for a living has no bearing on your eligibility for health insurance , especially now that ObamaCare is in full effect regarding guaranteed issuance of policies . In my experience , most real estate agents are self-employed/1099 contractor status people and not W2 employees of an agency . So , this probably means that you will need to get individual health insurance either through your state 's government health insurance marketplace or outside of it . So , just like you would tell those `` For Sale By Owner '' folks , you need to seek out an experienced health insurance agent who can assist you in obtaining coverage . If you have been without health insurance for more than 60-days and have n't had what is called a `` change of life status event '' -LRB- marriage , divorce , childbirth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- then you are in a time frame where you would be ineligible for enrollment in true major medical insurance until the next annual open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 and the earliest your coverage could go into effect would be for January 1st , 2015 . I hate to be the one to deliver this news but that is how ObamaCare works . Your only coverage option to carry you through until then would be to take out a Short Term Medical insurance plan . There are a variety of short term medical plan options available . However , you need to be aware that short term medical plans do still use limited underwriting questions , can decline a person for coverage and they do not cover pre-existing conditions . Please feel free to contact me if you need advice or assistance in this matter .
Any person eligible to purchase health insurance in the United States , with the exception of persons qualifying for Medicaid and/or Medicare is technically eligible to use the government health insurance marketplaces . Whether you would want to or whether it would make any sense for you to use them are other issues entirely . The government marketplaces will help determine if you would qualify for any premium tax subsidy for coverage purchased through their system . If you qualify for little or no premium subsidy then you may find that the government marketplaces may not best meet your needs . You will probably have larger selection of insurance carriers as well as possibly health plan and network options you may not find in the government marketplace . You should seek out the services of a health insurance broker to helpfind the best coverage for your situation . If you have coverage provider by an employer , and this coverage is deemed affordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act , -LRB- cost does n't exceed 9.5 % of your W2 income -RRB- then neither you nor your eligible dependents will be eligible for premium tax subsidies in the government marketplaces . This does not preclude someone from purchasing individual health insurance inside or outside of the government marketplaces and in some cases buying unsubsidized individual coverage for a dependent may be less expensive than adding them as a dependent onto your group plan .
This is a very broad question . If you mean Death Benefit Payments , then they are usually tax free . If you are supposed to be taxed , then the Insurance Company will send you a 1099 to include with your taxes and regular W2 . If you have not received a 1099 then you should owe no tax . If you have received a 1099 give it to your accountant or enter it into your tax software .
A 401 K Retirement Plan is a qualified ERISA plan that allows employers to offer their W2 employees a salary reduction by pretax contribution . Employers offering a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan may also offer matching contributions to the plan participants . The earnings accrue on a tax-deferred basis , but are tax at ordinary income rates at distributions . Those distributions will also be included in the provisional income test for Social Security Benefit taxation .
According to www.irs.gov , $ 50,000 or less of group-term life insurance that is carried directly or indirectly by the employer -LRB- meaning the employer pays for some or all of the life insurance for employees OR arranges for the premiums paid by at least one employee to subsidize the premium for at least one other employee -RRB- , does not have any tax consequences . Life insurance coverage over $ 50,000 that is carried directly or indirectly by the employer , will include on the W2 the amount of the premiums that is taxable to the employee . A policy that is not carried directly or indirectly by the employer has no tax consequences to the employee .
If you are filing a 1040 tax form as an employee you do not have to add it to your taxes . On group life insurance that the employer is paying on your behalf is tax free on premiums of the first 50,000 face amount . Any excess premiums paid by your employer is included in your income on your W2 . If your employer uses a 125 plan or cafeteria plan as they are commonly known , you are probably avoiding taxation through it as well . Again you need not do anything on your form 1040 . If youare the owner or employer of the company yourgroup life insurance premiums are not tax deductible just youremployees.It willnotbeaddedto your 1040 nor can it be deducted on your schedule C either .
Technically you ca n't in all but a few states . To form a group under the regulations of virtually all states you have to have an employer-employee relationship which at a minimum requires two people , the employer and at least one common law employee -LRB- generally a W2 status employee -RRB- . Colorado and Delaware do appear to be states that make provisions for a self-employed person to purchase health insurance on agroup contract basis . This is one of the issues the Affordable Care Act essentially dealt with beginning on January 1 , 2014 when it 's provisions eliminated pre-existing condition exclusions and being declined for coverage in the individual and group marketplaces . So , other than the fact that the open enrollment season concluded on March 31st , 2014 there is now no legal prohibition preventing a self-employed person from getting individual health insurance . This does not mean , however , that states have changed their individual laws regarding eligibility for group contracts and to the best of my knowledge no states have changed their policies in this regard . There are still a few industry association group health plans in existence but they have become increasingly rare over the years . For most self-employed persons reading this answer your best option and generally your only option will be to purchase individual health insurance .
They can be but it all depends on how you are filed with the state . Your best bet is to speak with an accountant regarding the viability of deducting these premiums . As an LLC filing as an S corp , for instance , the cost of your health insurance premiums is listed on your W2 as income thus it is not deductible in that scenario .
Mary Kay is a great organization offering quality products , personal service and an opportunity for women -LRB- and men -RRB- to be self employed . Most organizations like this will offer health insurance and other benefits to their full time W2 emplolyees , but the challenges in extending coverage to 1099 contract workers is usually too great to overcome .
You may be thinking of the Obamacare requirement that mandates employers provide health insurance for their employees or pay a penalty tax . The employer mandate does not apply to businesses with fewer than 50 full time employees . A full time employee means non-seasonal , W2 classification . Businesses that use seasonal or 1099 employees are exempt as long as their full time employee count is below 50 .
You first must establish verifiable income , generally for two years . Tax returns or W2s should serve as evidence of compensation . Self-employed persons may have additional requirements . The second item of qualification is your medical health condition and prior history . Then what amount do you want to cover from your varied income ? Compensation based on the average no frills disability insurance policy that can pay 60 % of your pay tax free , up to 80 % of your pay if you deduct the disability premium as a business expense .
Does a stay at home mom need disability insurance ? Yes , I would n't argue the need , the problem would be finding a company that would underwrite a homemaker disability policy . The basic element for any disability policy is a W2 or 1099 to prove income . Without one , I ca n't think of a disability carrier that would write such a policy .
You can have multiple disability policies as long as the total benefit amount can be validated with tax returns and/or W2 information . Keep in mid that you can add retirement contributions to the total earnings amount to increase coverage . And if you 're a business you may be able to add disability overhead insurance as well .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Auto Insurance Cover Uhaul ?
All personal auto insurance policies will have a vehicle weight limit for the vehicles they cover . While most will cover the policyholder in other vehicles , the coverage will not apply in vehicles that exceed that weight limit . You will need to read your specific policy to know exactly which Uhaul trucks would be covered . It may be only the smaller ones or it may be none at all .
The liability coverage of your personal auto policy extends to the U-Haul trailer you have rented . The physical damage coverage does not . You will need to insure the trailer with the U-Haul people . Check with your agent if you have a question involving rental of a truck . There might be limitations on that .
If it is a type of Uhaul that you drive then no . But if it is a type of uhaul that you are pulling the liability portion would come from your auto policy but it would not repair the trailer . There are some carriers that will cover the driving type Uhaul under a personal policy depending on how big it is . Many cases they will not . But Uhaul usually has insurance that you can purchase from them which would better for you in the long run in the event of an accident . Talk to an agent who is in your area they should be able to help you with this matter or talk to the uhaul business as I am sure they would have some good recommendations .
Your car insurance will cover you for liability but it may not cover damage to the Uhaul if you are in an accident or damage the truck . Check with your local agent or company to be sure that your policy covers the truck and to what extent . It only costs about $ 14 to purchase the extra insurance from Uhaul and it will cover any damage you do the truck with just a couple exceptions .
I not certain how having or not having automobile insurance would have an effect on renting a Uhaul trailer . If you are asking if your automobile insurance would extend to covering the rented Uhaul , the answer is maybe . Your automobile insurance liability coverage will typically travel with the insured not the vehicle , but comprehensive and collision coverage do not travel with the insured theyprovide coverage for thevehicle listed on the policy .
All personal auto insurance policies will have a vehicle weight limit for the vehicles they cover . While most will cover the policyholder in other vehicles , the coverage will not apply in vehicles that exceed that weight limit . You will need to read your specific policy to know exactly which Uhaul trucks would be covered . It may be only the smaller ones or it may be none at all .
That actually depends upon the terms and conditions of your policy so it would be a good idea to talk to your insurance professional about this . Unless there are specific limitations , with standard auto policies , you may find that the coverage applies to you and your car as well as to you and any other car you may be lawfully driving while it temporarily replaces your car . There are a couple of key things to remember if that is the case . First , only the coverage you have will apply so if you do n't have collision on your policy , it wo n't apply to any other car you are driving . Second , the coverage extension may also only apply to the use of other private passenger cars so it wo n't apply to that Uhaul truck you are planning on renting for the day .
Your car insurance will cover a rental car if you carry full coverage on your policy . If you have an accident in a rental car you will still be subject to your comprehensive and collision deductibles . Some companies will not cover commercial trucks -LRB- example : Uhaul truck -RRB- or vans so check with your agent just to be sure .
Probably so , yes . You see , in many cases , if you had automobile insurance , it may not extend coverage onto a commercial van or truck like that anyway . So in a case like that even if you had your own insurance , you would need to obtain the coverage that Uhaul might offer as part of their package .
It is always a good idea to check with your Insurance Professional when you are planning to rent a car . In many cases , the coverage that you have on your car -LRB- s -RRB- as provided by your Insurance Carrier , may extend over to a rental . It is important to consider , however , that this extension ov coverage may only apply to private passenger cars . In other words , if you are planning on renting a UHaul , for example , it may be neccesary in that situation for you to purchase the short term coverage that may be offered with the rental agreement .
It may or may not depending on the company that insures you . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your coverage to be sure . In many cases , liability and physical damage coverage -LRB- Comprehensive and Collision -RRB- will extend over onto another private passanger vehicle that you are using while it temporarily replaces your own . This extension , however , does not generally apply to commercial vehicles like Uhauls and the like .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover your auto while in the garage . Homeowners insurance covers the home and not autos . Only your auto insurance policy can protect your auto while in the garage . If you have an auto you do not drive and just store in your garage I would recommend purchasing comprehensive coverage only on your auto .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
I 'm afraid you have confused what comprehensive insurance means . In regards to comprehensive insurance , `` comprehensive '' is a component of auto insurance , but not a type of insurance . comprehensive coverage protects your vehicle from losses that occur by means other than collision . Examples include theft , vandalism , weather damage , hitting a deer , etc. . As far as borrowing someone else 's vehicle , your auto insurance does n't cover you . Their insurance does . That is , auto insurance always follows the vehicle , not the driver .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Who Is Covered Under Disability Insurance ?
First off , most Americans have Social Security disability benefits . Many American workers have employer group plans that offer at least short term disability coverage . Some business owners and their executive management teams have individual disability insurance . Each one of these examples has varying degrees of protection . Few Americans have individual disability insurance .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Can disabled people get life insurance ? This is an excellent question . There are some simplified issue policies that decline people on disability , as if all disabilities are the same . And disability is used as a factor in determining the health rating for many medically underwritten policies . So your question is very valid . The answer is `` yes '' , disabled persons can get life insurance . But they need to apply for a policy that fits their particular reason for disability . E.g. . If you use a cane for an old knee injury , you should pay much less than a person who usesa cane because he/she had toes amputated for diabetic complications . But if you do not use a company that is suited to your reason for disability , you may find yourself paying the higher price simply because you use a cane . The causes of disability are as varied as the number of illness and injuries that exist . And insurance companies sometimes treat those who receive Social Security Disability or private disability insurance as different from those who receive military disability benefits . So it does take an impaired risk life insurance broker with knowledge of multiple health conditions to sift through all your choices and find you the best one .
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The standard definition of who is covered under a renters policy is of course you , your relatives who live with you , anyone under 21 who is under your care and your legal representative if you were to die . If someone doesnt meet these categories and reside in the residence with you they can probably be named . Check with your agent to determine how that can be handled . If you want someone who doesnt live with you to have coverage , that probably can not be done .
Those who can claim disability insurance are persons who have suffered a disability that keeps them from working . The time when they receive the benefit will depend on when the disability was incurred and the elimination period stated in their policy . The disability itself also must be covered under the policy .
To confirm whether Part B will cover Prolia and what conditions must be met to have it covered , you will need to contact Medicare directly . I believe Prolia has been covered under Medicare Part B for a number of years up to one injection every 6 months - typically required to be recommended by your physician . It can often be listed under Part D plans ' formularies as well , but as it is often administered by a doctor , it would typically be cited under Part B. Please note , Part D plans can change their coverage year to year - they are not guaranteed renewable and every plan is different . The drugs that a plan covers can change , the premiums , deductibles , copays , coinsurance , and other factors of a plan can change each year . Plans can even be terminated or replaced and therefore automatically disenroll the consumer , forcing them to select another plan . For the insured person , it 's vital they review their prescription drug coverage each year to determine what plan will best serve their needs for the coming year . When Prolia is covered under Part B , a Medicare Supplement plan might cover the other 20 % of the cost after Medicare pays it 's 80 % share . Whether the Medigap insurer will cover the other 20 % would need to be confirmed with a carrier - when it comes to drugs covered by Part B , there 's usually a couple extra conditions that have to be met for it to be covered as most drugs are covered by Part D. I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with Medicare Supplement help . Thanks very much .
Disability insurance and the Family Medical Leave Act -LRB- FMLA -RRB- are two different animals . Disability insurance replaces a portion of income during the time the insured is unable to work due to a covered medical condition . FMLA is a federal law which provides unpaid job protected leave when an employee has to stop working due to his or her own disability , or to care for a sick family member . Disability insurance will not cover an FMLA leave when the employee is caring for a sick family member . It may cover the FMLA leave for an employee 's own disability . However the length of leave under FMLA -LRB- 12 weeks maximum -RRB- is different than the disability leave -LRB- while disabled up to the policy 's maximum benefit period -RRB- .
The VA offers life insurance for Veterans under certain conditions : 1 -RRB- Those separating from the service may convert their Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- to Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- for 120 days after release from active duty . With a statement of good health this can be extended one year . 2 -RRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -LRB- S-DVI -RRB- provides life insurance to Veterans who have been given a VA rating for a new service-connected disability in the last two years . Totally disabled veterans can get free coverage . 3 -RRB- Disabled Veterans who have qualified for a VA Specially Adapted Housing -LRB- SAH -RRB- grant may obtain Veterans ' Mortgage Life Insurance -LRB- VMLI -RRB- . Unfortunately , the VA does not offer coverage to Veterans who do not meet these parameters .
Every insurance company has different criteria for their Disability policies . So you would need to review the fine print of each policy to see what causes of disability , or what levels of disability , each policy excludes . Some things that different Disability insurance policies might not cover , or might limit coverage for , are disability due to mental or nervous disorders -LRB- some put a two year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability due to drug or alcohol abuse -LRB- some put a one year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability caused while committing a crime -LRB- this is usually not covered at all -RRB- , or disability caused by acts of war . Some policies also will cover total or permanent disability , but not partial or residual disability . Again , it is important to shop around and purchase a policy with the features that are most likely to be used , but also pick and choose so that you get a rate you can afford .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
The purpose of disability insurance is to provide income if you are unable to continue your work for an extended period of time due to an illness or and injury . In disability insurance , there are 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST CRITICAL item to look at in your coverage . As to which policy features which definition , you need to look at which carrier you 're using and what definition options their policies offer . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True Own Occupation -LRB- commonly referred to as `` own-occ '' -RRB- is the most favorable definition you can have on your policy . This definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . Modified Own Occupation has become the most common definition that most disability policies offer today . The first part of the modified definition is similar to the True Own Occupation definition , however , the second part of the modified definition is where the major change comes into play . The definition says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , and are NOT engaged in any other occupation . Gainful Occupation is a definition that is more commonly seen in group disability plans or plans offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability coverage . This definition provides the least coverage out of every disability plan . If you have a disability plan with this definition , you may want to look at securing coverage with a modified or true own occupation definition - or at the very least supplement the coverage . Many people who are looking for the cheapest disability plan will often end up with this definition on their policy Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance with many moving parts and quotes depend on a variety of factors . You can not simply shop for a disability policy as you would for a term life insurance policy . For this type of coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish . Please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks !
Great question ! Most folks know the importance of homeowners insurance , but few people realize all of the benefits and coverage available with a renter 's insurance policy . Coverage options differ between insurance companies , but here is a quick list of items that are typically covered : 1 . It covers replacing all of your belongings , including furniture , clothes , shoes , tools , laptops , and TVs after a covered loss . -LRB- Many people incorrectly assume that if they are renting , their personal belongings are covered under the property owner 's insurance policy ; in most cases the renter 's belongings are not covered under the owner 's policy . -RRB- 2 . It covers medical costs for guests who may be injured in your home . -LRB- Perhaps the neighbor sprained their ankle falling off of your step ? Wouldnt it be nice to cover their medical expenses as a courtesy , and not have to pay out of your own pocket ? -RRB- 3 . It gives you liability protection for events you may be held liable for on or off the property . -LRB- Maybe the neighbor who sprained their ankle decides to sue you ? -RRB- 4 . It covers additional living expenses , such as a hotel room , and dining out in the event you are temporarily evacuated from your home . -LRB- Perhaps a pipe bursts , and the landlord says you have to stay somewhere else for 10 days while they conduct repairs ? -RRB-
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
Job loss is always a unsettling period in our lives and having to address your health insurance concerns only compounds things . The first thing you should look into is the feasibility of continuing your coverage through your former employer 's health plan under either your state 's continuation of coverage provisions or , if your employer has 20 + employees , under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . Unless you were terminated with cause your former employer should have provided you with information regarding your rights in this area . If you have a spouse who is employed and has health insurance coverage available through their employer this is a qualifying event for you to be added as a dependent on your spouse 's plan or for you and your spouse to both enroll in the spouse 's employer 's health plan if you had both been enrolled under your former employer 's health plan . If your spouse has access to coverage through their employer this will almost certainly make you ineligible for subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Some people , especially those with family coverage , may find paying the entire premium for the former employer 's health plan to be cost prohibitive or may not want to continue be covered under it for other reasons . Losing coverage from an employer 's group health plan is a `` Qualifying Event '' that grants you a `` Special Election Period '' under the Affordable Care Act . You have a 60-day window after losing coverage to purchase individual health insurance either directly from an insurance carrier or through the state or Federal Health Insurance Marketplace in your state . The only good reason to purchase your coverage through a government health insurance marketplace is if your income level for 2015 would qualify you for a premium subsidy and possibly for cost sharing reductions . Currently a person 's qualification for these subsidies is based upon the applicant 's projected FAMILY income for all of 2015 . So , your situation is not an uncomplicated one . SEEK OUT AN EXPERIENCED HEALTH INSURANCE BROKER WHO REPRESENTS MULTIPLE INSURANCE CARRIERS AND WHO IS LICENSED TO SELL COVERAGE IN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE FOR GUIDANCE ON THESE MATTERS . If you are in good health and pre-existing condition coverage is not a concern for you , then in the event that the options I 've listed above do n't fit your financial needs , you can consider Short Term Major Medical insurance coverage as bridge coverage if you anticipate getting another job in the weeks or months ahead . These policies are usually less expensive -LRB- sometimes significantly so -RRB- than the options discussed above and can provide protection from financial ruin in the event an illness or injury occurs while the Short Term Medical policy is in effect . PLEASE NOTE : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty so there could be tax ramifications if you are covered under such a policy for more than 90-days . This does not mean that a Short Term Medical policy is an option you should not consider but it is an option that you should choose only with a full understanding of the positives and negatives associated with this choice . Which is another reason you should seek the guidance of an experienced Health Insurance Broker .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Do I Need Renters Insurance In Massachusetts ?
Massachusetts does not require you to obtain `` Renters '' insurance as it does auto insurance but your landlord or just good judgment may suggest this coverage be considered . Renters or Tenant/homeowners coverage provides coverage in three principal areas ; Damage to your personal property -LRB- clothing , furniture and/or household items -RRB- , Additional expenses to live in temporary quarters should your apartment or building be damaged or destroyed by a fire , wind or other covered cause , Personal liability coverage should certain acts cause injury or damage to someone , possibly your neighbors or even the building you occupy . Anyone responsible for maintaining a household should at least consider securing this type of coverage . It beats digging into your savings after a storm or fire or waiting for the Red Cross to give you a shirt , a bed and a hot meal . The cost for a basic policy would be in the $ 150-200 per year range . It certainly would be considered as important as maintaining comprehensive and collision insurance on a used car . In fact , simply increasing your deductibles on your car insurance may reduce your premiums enough to permit you to secure a basic policy .
At the time of this writing , the state of Massachusetts does not offer temporary Disability Insurance to residents without Disability Insurance . In addition , Massachusetts state laws do not require businesses to offer temporary Disability Insurance or to enforce mandatory sick time . So if you live in the state of Massachusetts you still may receive short term and/or long term disability coverage as a job benefit . But if you do not , it might be essential to purchase a private DI policy in order to get this type of protection .
Long Term Care Insurance in Massachusetts can come from many different companies , and most of the companies that have survived the recent price adjustments are very good . The one that is best for one person , however , may not be best for another . There are some companies that have better pricing for couples , some that offer certain features at a better price than another , etc. . To find who has the best long term care insurance for you , contact a broker who sells long term care insurance in Massachusetts . That way you can see your top three companies and then choose the one that has your best price , the highest rating , or a blend between the two , if those two factors do not coincide .
The main difference between Massachusetts and other states is in the Medicare Supplements . While most other states have ten or eleven options for supplements , Massachusetts has only two . The core supplement covers Medicare Part A and B coinsurance after you meet the yearly deductible and supplement 1 covers the deductible as well .
To find the best life insurance policy in Massachusetts , you can first go to a website that offers multiple quotes to see which has your best price . Pick the top 5 or so and look at the AM Best ratings for each company . Getting a reasonably priced policy with a company rated over A should be a good choice . There is no one best life insurance company in Massachusetts , but you can get the best option for you .
Massachusetts does not require you to obtain `` Renters '' insurance as it does auto insurance but your landlord or just good judgment may suggest this coverage be considered . Renters or Tenant/homeowners coverage provides coverage in three principal areas ; Damage to your personal property -LRB- clothing , furniture and/or household items -RRB- , Additional expenses to live in temporary quarters should your apartment or building be damaged or destroyed by a fire , wind or other covered cause , Personal liability coverage should certain acts cause injury or damage to someone , possibly your neighbors or even the building you occupy . Anyone responsible for maintaining a household should at least consider securing this type of coverage . It beats digging into your savings after a storm or fire or waiting for the Red Cross to give you a shirt , a bed and a hot meal . The cost for a basic policy would be in the $ 150-200 per year range . It certainly would be considered as important as maintaining comprehensive and collision insurance on a used car . In fact , simply increasing your deductibles on your car insurance may reduce your premiums enough to permit you to secure a basic policy .
So long as the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the City Ordinances of Boston do not prohibit a landlord from requiring proof of renters insurance from their tenants , then the landlord is free to include such proof as a condition of the lease . I 'd check with a local attorney or consult an official in the City Building Office to see if any such laws or ordinances apply . Regardless of they require it or not , it is always in your best interest to talk to an Insurance Professional and secure that coverage for yourself .
Renters insurance in Massachusetts can vary in price , depending on which carrier you are insured with and the limits of your policy . Typically , a rate of between $ 10 and $ 25 per month is common although the price could be much higher if you have scheduled property or other specialty items .
Im not sure what you mean by best auto insurance but I assume you may mean the least expensive and certainly in Massachusetts there are now a number of choices . I wouldnt however suggest those terms are interchangeable . Best does not necessarily mean least expensive . In fact , it may mean just the opposite . The best auto insurance would provide coverage for : 1 . Injury or damage you might cause to someone , in particular someone you care about who may be riding in your car . I would suggest a limit of not less than $ 100,000 . 2 . Injury to you or your family members residing with you should they be injured in an accident caused by someone else . Again I would suggest a limit not less than $ 100,000 . 3 . The cost to repair or replace your car or any car you happen to be driving -LRB- borrowed , loaned , rented -RRB- should it be damaged in an accident I would suggest not purchasing coverage on-line or over the phone from someone you have no other contact with . An insurance policy is a very expensive piece of paper until you get a chance to use it . Buy from someone who will help you complete the paperwork , someone who already has a good working relationship with the insurance company and someone who would stand with you if there were a problem . Once these conditions are met , then look at the pricing and make your selection . More often than not , this will be the best auto insurance for you and your family .
Most states are not no-fault states . However , there are a handful of states that are considered `` no fault . '' Based on my 32 years of experience in the business -LRB- and I do make mistakes ! -RRB- , I believe these states are no fault . But you can always check with the State Dept. Of Insurance to verify : Pennsylvania Florida Michigan New Jersey Utah Minnesota North Dakota Kentucky Massachusetts Hawaii Minnesota New York
There is no such thing as best car insurance in any state let alone Massachusetts . You may to need to qualify your meaning of best car insurance . Do mean best in lower rates , good service , best claims service ? There are few really bad insurance companies . The all come under state regulation are required certain level of ethics and behavior . It is true that you may encounter different experience as you engage any insurance company . That encounter may cement your opining about that company . Geico rates are going up because of a dismal first quarter profits . You opinion of Geico may change because they were once cheap and now they are expensive . What do really mean by best insurance company in Mass ?
The first actual mandatory auto insurance was in 1927 in the state of Massachusetts . Shortly after most other states began mandating auto insurance . Allot has changed in the laws over the years as it relates to financial responsibility but mandatory auto insurance has been around for a long time . Insurance is state regulated , not federal . There is a couple of states still do not mandate auto insurance if you can demonstrate the financial means to cover the minimum amounts for bodily injury , property damage and liability in that state . Of course you might as well put a sign around your neck that says please sue me , I have money .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
I 'm sorry to hear about the loss of your job . I hope you are able to find another soon . If your company was providing health insurance they should have provided you with information about COBRA ; a way for you to continue the coverage but now you would be responsible for paying 100-101 % of the premium . If the premium is too much for you to pay , then you should look for a more affordable plan on your own . Under the Affordable Care Act there is a specific time period called Open Enrollment , which in general occurs between November and February . This is the time when individuals can enroll in a new health plan , effective January 1 . However if you have a qualifying event you can enroll in a health plan no matter what time of year . Loss of employment is a qualifying event . But you only have 63 days to take action . Get in touch with your state 's Health Connector or an insurance agent and they should be able to assist you . If you 're in Massachusetts please feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Best of luck with everything .
The best answer that I was able to locate is fromaskdeb.com . Here it is : Car insurance polices actually evolved from maritime insurance hundreds of years earlier . The policies were to cover any losses and damages that might occur to property that was transported by ship . When the automobile was invented , these marine policies acted as a blueprint for car insurance . The first car insurance policy offered only liability coverage to protect any property that might be damaged by a motor vehicle . This first policy was written by an English insurance company back in 1895 . In the U.S. , the first liability car insurance policy was not written until 1898 and the first policy holder was a Dr. Truman J. Martin . It wasnt until 1927 that Massachusetts became the first state in the U.S. to pass the first mandatory insurance law .
Generally state laws require establishing residency within a certain amount of time within the state . Once residency is established , registration and insurance would need to be changed as soon as possible . Requirements vary from state to state , but you can find a summary on this website WEBSITELINK The requirements for Alaska , for instance , is 90 days . Massachusetts , however , is only 30 days . Check the resource for information about your particular state .
Life insurance in Massachusetts is exempt from income tax in most situations . If the death benefit is paid to the beneficiary in installments , the interest earned is subject to income tax . If the death benefit has interest earnings in addition to the face amount , the interest may be taxed . And if the face amount is cashed in before death , there are some tax implications for the policy owner . Aside from that , however , life insurance is not charged income tax as long as the beneficiary is a person , trust , or other entity.To avoid paying income tax , do not make the beneficiary the estate .
Health insurance in the US began during the Civil War era with policies issued by the Massachusetts Health Insurance Company . The Blue Cross association was the first group to start what would evolve in to modern health insurance plans in this country . Other carriers , including Time Insurance -LRB- now known as Asssurant -RRB- have a long history of offering health insurance to individuals and employer groups . Over the last few years carriers such as Mutual of Omaha , Bankers Life and Casualty , Aetna , Cigna -LRB- formerly Connecticut General -RRB- and others have become prominent in the health insurance market . Kaiser Permanente introduce the HMO concept in 1933
John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company was established in Massachusetts in 1862 . John Hancock went from a mutual company to a stock company in the year 2000 , and was renamed John Hancock Financial Services , Inc. . Manulife Financial Corp -LRB- based in Cananda -RRB- acquired John Hancock Financial in 2004 . John Hancock Life Insurance Company now writes life insurance in the USA . It is a highly respected carrier for life insurance and other financial products .
If you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- , and go to a doctor and that doctor does not accept Medicare assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- , the doctor reserves the right to bill you an `` excess charge '' . An excess charge is an amount up to 15 % above and beyond the medicare-approved amount for the services provided by the doctor . For each type of service , examination , procedure , etc. , Medicare has an approved amount they deem as a reasonable and customary charge - this is known as the `` Medicare-approved amount '' . If the doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full for services provided . If the doctor does not accept assignment , they can bill you an excess charge . For example , if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . If your Medigap plan covers excess charges , the Medigap insurance carrier will pay it for you . If the plan does not cover excess charges , you will be responsible for the payment of the excess charge . The two Medigap plans that cover excess charges are plans F and G. All of the other Medigap plans do not offer this benefit . So if you 'd like to have this benefit and do not already have a plan F or plan G , you may want to consider applying for one with a carrier . Remember , Medigap plans are standardized , so the only difference between insurance companies Medigap plans are the price they charge for it . Please note , certain states do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure law -RRB- . The states that do not allow excess charges are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . If you live in one of these states , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . Please note , those living in these states may want to consider Medigap plans C and D for price comparison to Medigap plans F and G as they provide the exact same coverage , just without the excess charge benefit , and may provide you some savings on your premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Do You Buy Car Insurance In Ohio ?
While you can purchase auto insurance through the mail or online , it is always best in my opinion , to purchase auto insurance through a local independent agent . An independent agent can help you shop several companies , find you not only the best rate , but can also provide sound advice based on your individual circumstances . A good agent can provide service ad help advocate any issues with the company . Contrary to what some would like you to believe , you do not save money on agent commissions by shopping online . A good agent can help you find the right coverage at the right price and provide the service you need .
The minimum Ohio car insurance liability limits are $ 12,500 per person , $ 25,000 per accident and $ 7,500 of property damage . These limits will increase by the end of 2013 . How much car insurance coverage should you carry ? If possible , amounts above the minimum required limits , since they are simply a low benchmark set for compliance . As an experienced Ohio car insurance broker since 1980 , our job is to help consumers find the lowest auto insurance prices from the major companies such as State Farm , Allstate , Progressive , Geico , Esurance , Liberty Mutual and many others . We do the shopping so our customers can save ! By utilizing a local experienced Ohio broker , you 'll save time , money and yes ... a lot of frustration !
As an experienced Ohio broker -LRB- 32 years of experience -RRB- , I 'll answer the question . No . That was simple ! You are not required to purchase life insurance in Ohio . For additional information regarding Ohio life insurance prices , consult an experienced broker who lives in Ohio and who is a FULL-TIME agent as opposed to a consultant , navigator or any other part-time position . An experienced agent/broker will shop the major carriers for you and provide expert advice in the state they are most familiar with ... Ohio !
When a licensed driver operates the insured car you own you are insuring the damage or injuries they cause in most places in this country . Insurance follows the car in Ohio . The driver has the financial responsibility for the injuries or damage in Ohio too if the car is not insured . The unfortunate answer is that permissive use by non-rated drivers is something insurance companies hate paying for and would love to avoid . It is something to ponder before loaning out your car because if it happens to you you wo n't be happy having the loss tagged to your record . I suggest you check with an agent in your state of domicile for the most accurate answer .
The best health insurance in Ohio is typically provided by one of the major companies in the state . These carriers are Anthem Blue Cross , UnitedHealthcare , Aetna , Medical Mutual or Humana . SummaCare offers policies in the Northern portion of the state . Healthspan -LRB- formerly Kaiser -RRB- is also available on the Exchanges . So how do you get the best health insurance prices in Ohio ? Perhaps I 'm a bit biased , since I 'm an experienced broker located here in Ohio with one of the premier websites . www.ohioquotes.com will help you easily enroll and find the best rates on the Exchange Marketplace . Of course , the key to getting the best rates from top companies is to have an expert shop and compare for you , help with calculating your federal subsidy -LRB- if you qualify -RRB- and helping with enrollment to the Ohio Health Exchange . Healthcare has significantly changed in the last few years with the passage of The Affordable Care Act . Policies are different and benefits have been revamped . It 's worth your time to utilize a broker to help you properly calculate the federal subsidy and determine the best available plans .
To get life insurance online in Ohio , go to a website that shows instant quotes and see if a quote comes up for Ohio . Once you have a policy in mind , either call or email the online website so that you can cover all the health questions to be sure you qualify for the one you chose , or to find a better option for you . The online agency in Ohio will guide you on how to apply and put the policy in effect . You can do it all without ever meeting with an agent .
You can easily purchase Ohio car insurance online at affordable rates . Fortunately , prices in the Buckeye state are quite low compared to most other ares . Recently , a national study concluded that our prices were among the lowest in the US . And they are ! We put our name on our website as we are located here in Ohio . Although located just North of Kings Island , we serve the entire state . Our address and phone number are easily available . There are many reputable websites . As an experienced Ohio broker with more than 32 years of experience , I endorse Ohiocarinsurancerates.com . Articles are current and regularly updated and your free quotes will allow you to find the lowest available prices from the top-rated carriers . But as previously mentioned , there are other reputable national websites . Naturally , your rate will depend on many factors , including -LRB- but not limited to -RRB- your age , zip code and driving record . Rates , for example , in the Cincinnati area will be different than the cost in Toledo or Akron . The Columbus area -LRB- and Central Ohio -RRB- does typically feature some of the most competitive options in the state .
Health insurance for one person in Ohio can cost as little as $ 30 per month , depending on your age , zip code and the type of plan you are purchasing . A temporary policy will be the cheapest type of medical coverage . Recent legislation -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- has created the Ohio Health Exchange , that includes a federal subsidy that could substantially reduce your premium . But how do you get these low rates ? As an experienced broker here in Ohio -LRB- just North of Cincinnati -RRB- we utilize our experience -LRB- 32 years in the business -RRB- along with our top-rated websites to find the best options for consumers . Your monthly premium may be as low as $ 30 or quite a bit higher . The most important thing is to ensure that your existing conditions are covered and the most cost-effective policy is elected , so you pay the lowest premium for the maximum amount of benefits .
There are loopholes in Ohio law . But generally speaking , if you have a valid drivers license , then you can buy auto insurance . If you do not have a valid drivers license , you can still buy auto insurance if you own a vehicle . But you will have to have a driver on the policy with a valid drivers license , such as a spouse , family member . In this case , you will have to exclude yourself as a driver -LRB- meaning there is no coverage if you drive the vehicle -RRB- . Most auto insurance companies will also require you to designated a licensed driver as the named insured . Drivers can also be insured using a valid foreign drivers license . But not all companies will do this . So you will need to look around a little harder . Also , understand that Ohio has 2 different laws on the table that are completely opposed to one another . So these laws could change drastically in months to come , if either of these proposals go into effect .
Pre-existing health insurance in Ohio is now available at prices lower than ever before . Thanks to the Affordable Care Act , you can not be denied because of medical issues and your pre-existing conditions are covered without any waiting period or surcharges . You need to apply for coverage through the Ohio Health Insurance Exchange -LRB- also known as the `` Marketplace . '' A new federal tax subsidy will drastically reduce your premiums if you qualify . OK . How do you compare rates and enroll ? Visit the premier trusted resource in the state for Ohio healthcare coverage , which is Ohioquotes.com . Within a few minutes , you can view options and easily apply . An experienced local broker -LRB- 33 years of experience -RRB- is always available . The most popular companies are Anthem Blue Cross , Medical Mutual , Humana and Healthspan . If your need is short-term , a UnitedHealthcare temporary plan may be the best option . Open Enrollment is going on right now so you can visit the website and shop , compare , apply and save . When Open Enrollment ends , there are non-Exchange options that will be available .
Getting life insurance online in Ohio can save you time , money and frustration . Purchasing a policy through an Ohio broker and their website will allow you to shop and compare the top-rated companies and their policies . As an Ohio broker for more than 32 years , we 're aware of which carrier offer the best rates and what types of plans are the most appropriate for your situation . We 're `` in your community '' and share the same goals and dreams you do . The combination of a top-rated website and three decades of local experience is tough to beat ! Term and permanent coverage is available that is suitable for the vast majority of people that apply . For persons with serious medical conditions , there are companies that specialize in non-standard risks and often the prices are extremely affordable . `` No physical '' policies are also available from many of the top carriers .
Medicare Part A and Part B is provided by the Social Security Administration for every state , including Ohio . To apply for Medicare in Ohio , you can call the Social Security Administration at 800-663-4227 -LRB- 800-MEDICARE -RRB- . If you are looking for Medicare Supplemental Insurance , there are a number of companies that sell this type of coverage in Ohio . You may be able to get a quote through your own health insurance provider .
Auto insurance is mandatory here in Ohio . As an Ohio broker since 1980 -LRB- Has it been that long ? -RRB- , we help consumers meet the mandatory minimum liability requirement in the most affordable way . By shopping multiple companies , consumers can view and compare the lowest rates . Also , keep in mind that it is always a good idea to consider liability limits higher than what is legally required . Although youthful rates can be a bit expensive , as you get older , rates typically reduce quite a bit . This is an ideal time to review your existing coverage . Ironically , the Ohio state minimum limits were recently increased from $ 12,500 / $ 25,000 to $ 25,000 / $ 50,000 . It had been quite a while since the limits were increased .
Fortunately , Ohio features some of the least expensive health insurance rates in the US . The major carriers in the state are Anthem Blue Cross , UnitedHealthcare -LRB- Golden Rule -RRB- , Medical Mutual , Aetna and Humana . Assurant and Celtic also offer coverage although their prices are not always competitive . SummaCare , Kaiser and HealthAmerica offer plans in portions of Northern Ohio . Reputable websites and/or experienced brokers can often offer policies to consumers . Typically , individual , family and small-business plans are available . Of course , in 2014 , policies can be purchased -LRB- with help from a broker , if needed -RRB- through the Ohio Health Exchange , a `` marketplace '' created from `` The Affordable Care Act . '' Federal tax subsidies will be available to those persons that qualify .
Yes , you can not drive a car in Ohio without insurance . Ohio state minimumsfor liability are $ 25,000 / $ 50,000 . However , minimum coverage is just that : Minimum . You should work with an agent that can explain these coverages to you and provide you with a guideline for coverage based on your specific financial situation .
On average , Auto insurance in Ohio is near the lowest in the nation . Ohio averages $ 648 for auto insurance for 6 months , which is nearly $ 200 less than the national average . -LRB- WEBSITELINK -RRB- There are a number of reasons , however , that YOUR rates may be higher . The obvious factors of driving record , type of car , your age and gender , and where you liveplay a role . However , some other factors are credit score , length of time with a previous insurer , and even education/occupation can help determine which risk category you fall into . Another factor to consider is the amount of coverage you are receiving for the premium you are paying . The more coverage you have , the higher your payment will be . However , you should remember that minimum coverage is just that : MINIMUM . It likely would n't be enough to pay if you were sued for causing a serious accident .
The State of Ohio does not require Ohio residents to purchase life insurance . They also do not require employers to provide life insurance . Life insurance is still a voluntary purchase in every state , and you are free to purchase the amount and type of policy you want , and that fits your budget .
In Ohio if the cash value of a life insurance policy and other assets is greater than $ 1500 you must spend down . When it come to life insurance you have a few options depending on how long you have had the policy . Prepay your Funeral , assign the policy to the funeral home , or purchase a Funeral Trust with the cash value in the policy . A Funeral Trust policy irrevocably assigns the death benefit of a life insurance policy to a Funeral Trust set up by the insurance company and can only be paid out for expenses directly related to the funeral and final expenses . This makes the policy Medicaid Exempt . In Ohio you can put up to $ 15000 in a Funeral Trust . In some states you would need a Goods and Services contract to go along with the Trust . Your agent should be able to help you with that . If you cash surrender the policy the money can not be gifted to your beneficiary , you must spend it on yourself or use it in the ways mentioned above . There are rules in place that can preserve some of your assets . A good Medicaid Care Resource Planner or Elder Law attorney can help you with that issue .
Auto insurance in Ohio is actually fairly inexpensive ... if you know where to look . As an experienced broker here in Ohio -LRB- just North of Cincinnati -RRB- , we specialize in finding the lowest available rates offered by the top-rated carriers . Prices are based on many factors including your age , where you live , the type of vehicle you drive and how good -LRB- or bad ! -RRB- your driving record is . Typically , rates here in the Buckeye state are lower than most other states . A younger driver -LRB- under 21 -RRB- will usually pay a higher rate . There are , however , many discounts that can help reduce the premium . Each carrier has a different set of discounts so shopping can make a big difference . Also , by having an experienced broker shop for you , you may be able to find better pricing . Whether its State Farm , Esurance , Progressive , Geico or Farmers -LRB- or many others -RRB- , as experienced brokers with top-rated websites , our job is to help consumers find not only the best prices , but the most appropriate coverage for their specific circumstances .
Life insurance rates in Ohio are very affordable . Since most major carriers publish `` national '' rates and not `` statewide '' rates , you may not see a big variance -LRB- if any -RRB- of prices from one state to another . Life insurance prices -LRB- especially term -RRB- do vary greatly though , from one carrier to another . As an Ohio broker -LRB- for 32 years -RRB- , specializing in life/health insurance , our job is to shop hundreds of companies for you , find the plans that best meet your specific needs at the lowest possible cost , and simplify the underwriting process . And that 's exactly what a good experienced broker with a reputable website does !
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Life Insurance Can I Get Without A Medical Exam ?
The most Life Insurance I have heard of being able to get without a medical exam is $ 500,000 in one policy . However , you can purchase more than one life insurance policy without a medical exam . It would not be difficult to purchase $ 1,000,000 of No Exam life insurance by purchasing 3 policies .
It depends on the insurer and the type of life insurance , but I personally have not seen any amounts larger then $ 250,000 without a medical exam . However typically you will find that most insurers are uncomfortable with underwriting such large policies without a medical exam . Most often it will be about 1/5th to 1/3rd that amount . However there are certain variables that may come into play depending on the situation .
There are policies that offer up to $ 350,000 without any exam at all , and up to $ 1,000,000 with just a paramed exam that does not include a blood sample . Some will take an oral swab in place of blood test . If you take two or more No Exam policies with different companies , you can get a pretty large amount of coverage with no exam at all .
There are life insurance policies that can take a very long time to get , and there are policies that can take a very short time to get . The difference is how much is required during underwriting and how fast or slow the people working on your application are moving . While rare , No Exam life insurance exists that can literally be applied for , approved and issued within an hour . Most No Exam life insurance policies take a few days or more , depending on whether they also order medical records , and depending on how fast that particular life insurance company processes their No Exam policies . If the agent or agency you used is nonresponsive , this can also hold things up . Policies that require medical underwriting can take much longer . If you are in good health and utilize a `` quick '' app like many carriers offer , you will often need to do a long phone interview , but this can cut down your chances of the life insurance company ordering medical records . Having to wait on doctor 's offices providing medical records to the insurance carrier is the major cause of extended time during underwriting , so if that step is avoided , the process will go much faster . If your policy does require medical records to be approved -LRB- most policies requiring an exam do require medical records if a health condition exists -RRB- , you can help speed it up by calling your doctor 's office or perhaps even obtaining your medical records yourself . Also , be sure to list on your application ALL the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , or any physicians that were involved in your diagnosis . Being able to order those from the start , rather than having the underwriter find out about them through reading one set of records and THEN having to order those additional records , can shave weeks to months off of the time it takes to put your policy in effect . Finally , if you are need to take a medical exam , take it as soon as possible . Much of the rest of the process revolves around that , so getting that out of the way quickly could help you have a policy in your hands within one month .
No Medical Exam Life Insurance -LRB- also called No Exam Life Insurance , Nonmed Life Insurance , Simplified Life Insurance , Guaranteed Life Insurance , and other titles -RRB- is life insurance that does not require taking a paramed exam . More to the point , it does not require giving a blood sample , which is the part of the exam that some people want to avoid . No Medical Exam Life Insurance usually costs more than life insurance that does require an exam , for very healthy people . But for those who are overweight , get `` white coat syndrome '' -LRB- high blood pressure while having exams -RRB- , or have not had their cholesterol checked for years , foregoing an exam can result in very competitive rates . It is not unusual for someone to apply for a medically underwritten policy , get rated up for something they did not know they had , and end up paying more than the No Exam policy would have cost . Also , for those with serious health conditions , No Medical Exam Life Insurance is often the only type of life insurance available to them . Finally , many people like No Exam policies because they feel that the time spent in taking the exam and waiting for the underwriter to review their medical records -LRB- if the latter is needed -RRB- is not worth it . While it is not always an option , it is nice to have some No Medical Exam policies to choose from . Agents selling both types of coverage can help you discern which is best for you .
You can buy term life insurance in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- with an exam , or 2 -RRB- without an exam . 1 -RRB- With an exam . You would choose this option if you have reasonably good health , because you will be evaluated by your exam results to see if you qualify . Also , taking a medically underwritten policy that requires an exam is generally for those who want a larger face amount than a a burial policy . It can save you money to go to the added effort of taking the exam , and the exam does not incur any cost to you . It is generally done in your home , and entails a blood sample , urine sample , height , weight , blood pressure , pulse , and medical questions . Backing up , you first contact a website or agency to decide what face amount and length of term you want . You will be asked many medical questions to determine which company has your best price . Then you fill out an application , either by paper or online or over the phone . The exam follows , and possibly the underwriter will order medical records from your doctor -LRB- s -RRB- . When a decision has been made , some agents call you to tell you -LRB- e.g. we give you the option to change the face amount or term if it did not turn out as hoped -RRB- . Some just mail you the policy . You accept it by filling out some delivery paperwork . Payment can be done by check -LRB- almost always reserved for quarterly , semi-annual or annual payments -RRB- or bank or credit card draft . 2 -RRB- Without an exam . People often choose this method for : a. smaller policies , b. because they can not qualify for a policy that requires an exam , c. because they do not like having their blood drawn , and/or d. because they do n't want to go through the hassle of an exam . Some no exam policies have quite reasonable rates , especially for those who would qualify as standard on medically underwritten policies . This type of application is usually filled out online and signed digitally , but can be done by paper application , as well . The process goes a lot faster than applying for a policy requiring an exam . The policy often goes into effect as soon as approved and the first payment is drafted . I hope that helps . Please feel free to contact me for more information .
A hybrid life insurance policy blends both non-medical and fully underwritten coverage . The idea is you get a portion of the death benefit being applied for as full coverage without an exam -LRB- the rest being AD&D coverage -RRB- and the rest turns into full coverage after an exam is completed and you 're approved . The initial process can be completed in just a few days -LRB- typically 48 hours or so -RRB- - when the exam is completed , it can take a few weeks for the underwriting to be wrapped up . Once the initial non-medical coverage is in force , you can then decide to take an exam to turn the rest of the coverage into full coverage -LRB- you generally have a window of about 6 months to complete the exam - can vary by carrier -RRB- . Even if you come up with poor numbers and are declined for the rest of the coverage being turned into full coverage , you can still keep the initial format of the plan because it 's already in force . It 's probably easier to envision with an example . If you apply for $ 250,000 of coverage with a 20-year term period under a hybrid life policy and you 're approved for the non-medical side -LRB- again , typically takes only a couple of days -RRB- , only a portion of the coverage will be full coverage . So let 's say the coverage is actually $ 100,000 of full coverage and $ 150,000 is AD&D -LRB- actual ratios will vary by carrier -RRB- . This means that if you died without completing the exam and getting the rest of the coverage approved , only $ 100,000 would be paid out instead of the full $ 250,000 . The only way the full $ 250,000 would be paid is if you died under accidental means -LRB- e.g. a car accident -RRB- . It sounds like a great idea on paper , right ? You 're getting coverage quickly and you 've got something locked in in case you ca n't qualify for the full coverage transition . There 's a huge issue with this type of program !!!! The RATE PER $ 1,000 of full coverage that you 're paying under a hybrid life policy can -LRB- and likely will be -RRB- A LOT higher than you would be paying for coverage under a traditional life policy - meaning you can end up spending a ton of extra money on premiums unnecessarily that could easily be in your own pocket . The chances of a claim for AD&D coverage is slim to none . You 're most likely to die from illness than you are to die from injury . *** You want to be paying the lowest cost per $ 1,000 of full coverage - this is the key point you want to look at when you 're buying your coverage . *** Think about it this way . If you 've got a $ 250,000 non-medical policy and a $ 250,000 hybrid policy , and the premium for the hybrid policy is less , you 're actually paying a much higher rate because only a portion of the face amount is full coverage , where as the entire face amount under the regular non-med policy is 100 % full coverage . But you can just take the exam and turn it into full coverage right ? Problem solved ? - NO !!! If you 're willing to take an exam in the first place , you may as well have just done a traditional fully underwritten program to start with , because the premiums for those programs are substantially less than they are for hybrid policies and you have full coverage from day 1 . The long and short of it is this - if you do n't want to take an exam , buy a non-medical policy . If you 're willing to take an exam to lower your premiums or secure a higher amount of coverage , apply for a fully underwritten program because you 're going to get much better rates . The idea with hybrid policies is to try to get the best of both worlds , but the process just does n't make much sense with how much you 're spending for full coverage . I hope this provides some clarification for you . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Of course , how much life insurance costs for a 20 year old depends on how much life insurance the 20 year old is purchasing , how long they want the premium to be locked in , whether they have any health problems , and if they want to purchase a policy that requires an exam or goes with a quick policy requiring no medical exam . For a very healthy nonsmoker at age 20 , who is purchasing $ 100,000 of 30 year level Term without having to take an exam , the price is about $ 25/month . This is much less if you take an exam .
It can take from hours to months to be approved for life insurance . If you are applying for a simplified issue policy that requires no exam or medical records , can be signed digitally and approved on the phone , it may go into effect very quickly . The cons : this type of policy does not dig too deep , and can decline you very easily if you do not fit their exact criteria . They also usually charge higher rates to cover the risk of not knowing everything about you . The pros are that you get by without the hassle of an exam and can get the coverage very quickly . When applying for a larger policy that does require an exam and medical records , the time in underwriting largely depends on when you schedule your exam and how long it takes for your doctor 's office to send your records to the life insurance company . Another thing that can hold up approval is if you saw a doctor that the underwriter wants input from , but records were not ordered from that doctor , or the doctor has left and no one knows where those records are . Finally , an insurance website or agency that is not skilled at working this type of case can slow things down by simply not knowing how to stay on top of cases like this . To speed up approvals for a case involving exam and medical records : 1 -RRB- use an agent who has experience in impaired risk underwriting ; 2 -RRB- list all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , and all doctors who made your diagnoses ; 3 -RRB- schedule your exam ASAP ; 4 -RRB- notify your doctors that medical records will be ordered , or obtain the records yourself ; and 5 -RRB- answer all questions from your agent and/or case manager promptly . These tips can cut the time for approval , even in a complicated case , from months to weeks .
The cost of No Exam life insurance varies a lot because No Exam life insurance is use for so many reasons . Some people get No Exam insurance for convenience . In those cases , if they have very good health , the person may be able to get a lower price if applying for a policy that requires an exam . But to them , it is worth it to not miss time off work and go through the blood sample and exam . Some people get No Exam insurance because they are obese or have a health condition that does not qualify them for a medically underwritten policy . While the cost might seem high , for them it is worth it . Other persons can actually sometimes get a lower price with No Exam insurance than they could with life insurance requiring an exam . This can be the case with final expense insurance , overweight life insurance , or life insurance for persons of older ages . Part of the reason is that No Exam life insurance offers a minimum face amount requirement than most medically underwritten policies .
Filling out the life insurance application itself takes about 30 minutes for a medically underwritten policy -LRB- one that requires a paramed exam -RRB- . Having your drivers license , the date of birth and possibly Social Security numbers of your beneficiaries , and all your doctors ' information on hand will save time in filling it out . Once the application is submitted , you will take your free exam in your home or other place of your choice . Sometimes medical records are ordered . The time it takes complete the process depends partly on how quickly you take your exam and how quickly records are obtained . If you apply for a policy without an exam , the policy is issued much more quickly .
The most Life Insurance I have heard of being able to get without a medical exam is $ 500,000 in one policy . However , you can purchase more than one life insurance policy without a medical exam . It would not be difficult to purchase $ 1,000,000 of No Exam life insurance by purchasing 3 policies .
Here are the most common things people look for when buying life insurance from us . 1 -RRB- Price . They are looking for the best price for their health , age , tobacco status , etc. 2 -RRB- Exam . They want to compare policies with and without exam , and decide whether or not taking an exam is worth it for them . The majority of those who look into No Exam coverage do go ahead with no exam because : a. it is all they can get ; b. it is less risky and not much price difference than a medically underwritten policy ; or c. they need the policy in a hurry and are willing to pay extra to not take an exam . 3 -RRB- Length of Coverage : Most people who are not well versed in life insurance are concerned what will happen when their term ends and `` what happens to their premiums '' . When looking for life insurance , a shopper has to understand how different types of policies work , and the agent needs to take the time to make that explanation clear to them . 4 -RRB- Guarantees : They want to know if the premium will go up , if it will pay for death by any reason , if there is a guaranteed cash value , etc. 5 -RRB- Company Stability : They want to be sure that their life insurance company will pay out upon their death .
To get life insurance without a medical exam , you first contact a life insurance agency that sells that type of policy . Then , depending on the policy , you fill out an application over the phone and sign it digitally , or on paper and fax or mail it to your agent . Some no exam policies will then require a phone interview . The person doing the interview will try to call you , and leave a number if they can not reach you , that you can call back at your convenience . Some no exam policies will order medical records from your doctor . Most often , that step is not required . When approved , most life insurance without a medical exam will draft your first premium and put it into effect as soon as it is approved . Some will let you pay the premium after you receive the policy in the mail . In addition to the above , there are some nonmedical life insurance policies that will do a phone interview with you and your agent to fill out the application and put the policy into effect all at the same time .
This can actually be a bit of a loaded question because the type of coverage you 're looking for , how much coverage you want , how long you need it for , your risk classification , the carrier you apply with , and a number of other factors control how much a life insurance policy will cost . Premiums can be anywhere from a few dollars to thousands of dollars . The risk classification is the most critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends on a number of factors including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Keep in mind , every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines and mortality tables , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- Non-medical policies generally cost more than fully underwritten policies that require an exam because an insurance company is taking on more risk without having a full medical picture of you . Consult with an experienced life insurance broker to determine what coverage is appropriate/suitable for your needs and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , getting life insurance without a physical can be a very good way to get life insurance , especially if you do not fit in the very best health class due to weight or minor health conditions . People sometimes opt to take an exam because the price looks like it will be less . But then after taking the exam , they are rated higher and the price ends up being more than what a No Exam policy would have cost . No Exam life insurance makes getting life insurance much quicker and easier and less stressful .
Good points y' all ... What was the desired answer from the question ... The exam for GETTING life insurance -LRB- there has n't been an exam for health insurance in most states for YEARS . Now with PPACA , there are no exams for sure -RRB- . or ... the exam to get a license ? Since this site is for people to ask questions about insurance products & coverage , I assume it was NOT about getting licensed . For life insurance , the exam , or lack thereof , depends on the carrier & the amount you are applying for . The same person would have a light exam -LRB- small blood draw , tinkle in a cup , blood pressure reading , & questions -RRB- for a lower benefit amount -LRB- like 100K - 250K -RRB- vs. a larger benefit amount of 1 million . Think of it this way , `` The more you want from them , the more they 'll want from you . '' :--RRB- There are carriers that offer `` no exam '' underwriting options . MOST of these plans are for smaller amounts -LRB- under 250K -RRB- . The underwriting is typically pretty quick . The process can be as little as a few days . The tradeoff for not probing as deeply into you -LRB- literally -RRB- is that the cost of insurance is higher . You are likely to get the same coverage for less if you are willing to take an exam . Compare the length of coverage , extra coverage like Living Benefits , the convenience factor -LRB- exam or no exam -RRB- , the underwriting possibilities appetite of the carrier -LRB- your agent should discuss WHY this carrier is best over others - - the reason should be `` best underwriting for YOU '' -RRB- , and THEN the rate . Rates are relative to what you can qualify for . DO N'T fall for the big `` Dot coms '' that say you can get 500K for $ 20 a month ... MOST of use can not get that . If you have any questions , please reach out !! - gravy
Some Term Life Insurance requires an exam and some Term policies do not . There are No Exam Term Life policies for up to $ 500,000 . Therefore , you could get several policies and get up to $ 1,000,000 of coverage without having to take a paramed exam , if you wish . For those with perfect health , taking an exam can usually save you some money . However , if you are overweight or have other minor health problems , No Exam Term can be surprisingly competitive . For some people , the inconvenience of having to take off work to do the exam , or a dislike of needles , is worth the slightly higher price of getting nonmed Term Life . There are many life insurance policies that do not require a physical . Please do not hesitate to drop me an email if you 'd like to see some options .
It 's very difficult to say what you should be paying for life insurance because it depends on a number of factors and we all have our own needs and budgets . There 's many factors that go into premium pricing to say what an average plan costs . The risk class is the MOST critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends on a number of items including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Keep in mind , every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines and mortality tables , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- Also affecting the premium for a policy is the type of policy you 're looking to secure - how much coverage do you want/need and for how long do you want/need it guaranteed for -LRB- term vs. permanent -RRB- . Non-medical policies generally cost more than fully underwritten policies that require an exam because an insurance company is taking on more risk without having a full medical picture of you . Consult with an experienced broker to see what programs are available and what structure would be most suitable to best serve your needs . We have in-depth knowledge of products from many different carriers and can help you through the entire process of securing life insurance from figuring out how much coverage you need and how long to placing the coverage in force and beyond . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
If you are applying for a policy that requires an exam , there is the chance that the underwriter will want to see your medical records . As an impaired risk life insurance specialist , I have seen several cases take nearly 6 months due to the complexity , amount , and elusiveness of those applicants ' medical records . This is what I have learned , to help speed up the process . 1 -RRB- Put all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years on your application , and include the doctor who diagnosed your most serious health conditions . Delays often happen because records are received , but then the underwriter notices that the patient was referred to someone else during that time . Getting all your doctors noted at the start does not necessarily mean the insurance company will order records from all of them , but at least it gives underwriters the opportunity to pick and choose which ones they want , so they order them in a timely manner . 2 -RRB- Do your exam quickly . Putting of an exam for months sets back the whole application process . Sometimes medical records are not even ordered until the exam is done . 3 -RRB- Warn your doctor or clinic that they will be getting a request for your medical records , and ask them to fill the order ASAP . You might even want to collect your own medical records to speed things up , if that is allowed . 4 -RRB- Provide additional details in a timely manner . Sometimes insurance companies will see something on your MIB or MVR or application that will cause them to need more information . Answering that extra question , filling out that extra form , or doing whatever needs to be done , can eliminate unnecessary delays . 5 -RRB- Do n't jump to another company without talking it over with your agent first . Give him/her a chance to find out where the logjam is , and get it cleared up . If you can not get answers from your agent , it 's OK to switch , but close your first application out , or transfer it to someone else . Otherwise , you may end up applying for the same policy with two different agents , and that can cause further complications and delays .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
How To Accept Long Term Care Insurance ?
When you are applying for Long Term Care Insurance and are approved , the company will send you a copy of your policy . There is usually some delivery paperwork to sign , including any amendments made to your policy . By signing the delivery paperwork and paying the first premium , that is usually how you accept a long term care insurance policy .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
AARP no longer provides long-term care insurance . Genworth withdrew its `` affinity marketing agreement '' to accept applications for a special plan of LTCi designed for the AARP members , effective June 1 of this year . Genworth will continue serving policyowners that have previously purchased the Genworth AARP contract and will , of course , pay all legitimate claims . AARP reported that they are not looking for a new carrier to take Genworth 's place at this time , but would be acceptable to negotiating with any LTCi carrier that might come forward with a proposal . The largest and perhaps most vocal advocate for those over 50 in the US , and a major source of educational material on health-related issues for seniors , AARP said that they will continue to provide information about long-term care planning and the roll long-term care insurance might play in such planning .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
The people who buy long term care insurance are those who have assets to protect and/or those who want to have a say in where they will spend their final days of life . Without long term care insurance , assets must be spent down in order to pay for the care . When those funds are gone , Medicaid pays , and the care must be received where Medicaid is accepted . Most long term care insurance now pays the insured person so that they can spend the funds in the location of their choice .
Yes , a private CNA is allowed to accept long term care insurance . I would recommend you contact the insurance companies whose coverage you would like to accept and inquire about becoming a participating provider . They may ask that you accept a discount on your regular fee and agree to accept that charge as payment in full .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Age Does Term Life Insurance Come To An End ?
Term life insurance ends at the end of the term . E.g. . If you take out a 10 year term life insurance policy , the policy will end at the end of the 10th year . Otherwise , the premium will jump to a much higher price at that time , and go up each year after that .
Term life insurance may end at the end of the term , or it may go up in price at the end of the term . The end of the term is the period when the guaranteed premium ends . E.g. . If you buy a ten year term policy , the policy will end or the premium will go up at the start of year 11 . Because the premiums go up so high , most people do end their term policies when the term ends . However , if there is a provision for the premium to go up -LRB- called annually renewable -RRB- , it can go up to whatever age the policy dictates . Some are annually renewable as high as age 90 . Another option offered for many term policies is to convert the policy to permanent insurance . This must be done before the term ends . Again , the price per thousand dollars of coverage is much higher for the new policy than it was for the term policy . However , it is a good option if you can not qualify for new insurance , and you may be able to take a smaller face amount to keep the premium affordable .
Term insurance will expire at some point in time as term policies are closed contracts which have a beginning and an end . With newer term policies the end comes between the ages of 90 to 95 . Many of the older term policies written end between the ages of 70 and 80 . If you have an older term policy , check to see when the policy ends and if there is a conversion option if you need coverage longer than you previously thought you would . As Jerry mentioned most term policies written currently have level premium periods of 5-30 years , but still have a life after in most cases . The cost after the level period expires will be much higher and increase every year after until the policy ends .
The age that Life Insurance ends is dependent on the age that the person was when they took it out , and the type of policy they took out . For Term Life Insurance , the policy ends -LRB- or goes up in price to what is usually an unaffordable cost -RRB- at the end of the term . Therefore , someone who is 55 years old and takes out a 10 year Term policy will have to find a new policy at age 65 . For Whole Life Insurance , the policy ends when death occurs or when the policy matures -LRB- typically at age 100 -RRB- . At either time , the full amount of the death benefit is paid -LRB- when the policy matures , you are actually receiving the cash value , which becomes equal to the death benefit , called `` endowment '' -RRB- . If you quit paying premiums on the policy , or borrow without paying it back , the policy could end sooner without any benefit being paid . This is true for any type of Life Insurance policy . Some Whole Life policies are paid for with a single premium ; as long as you do n't borrow from them , those will be in effect upon death or maturity without paying any more premiums , as will any policy that is `` paid up '' at a certain point . Universal Life operates much like Whole Life , except you can pick an age at which your guaranteed coverage will end .
What do you need to know about term life insurance ? You need to know that : 1 -RRB- Unless you have some type of rider stating otherwise , term life insurance will jump way up in price at the end of the term , and go up in price annually after that . Or it will end at the end of the term . 2 -RRB- Most term life insurance will stay the same premium during the entire term , and the death benefit will stay the same for the entire term . But you need to ask your agent to make sure you are buying a guaranteed level premium , and a guaranteed level death benefit , to be sure . 3 -RRB- There is no cash value in term life insurance . Only ROP -LRB- return of premium -RRB- term will pay back a substantial cash value if you keep it enough years , and are alive at the end of the term . 4 -RRB- If you miss a payment more than two months , your term policy will end . There is no cash value in it to pay the premium , so it is very important to keep up your payments with term life insurance . 5 -RRB- Many term policies are convertible to permanent insurance for at least part of the term period . If you convert your term policy , you must convert it to the policy or policies stipulated by the life insurance company at that point in time . These policies may or may not have lifetime guarantees , but will be UL or WL . The rate will be based on your age at the time of conversion . There are no health requirements ; your permanent policy will be rated similarly to what your term policy was rated .
It is going to depend on the type of policy purchased . For term insurance there is a stated policy end . Usually with newer term policies the end is age 90 or 95 . With older policies as young as 70 could be the end . AARP 's term life ends at age 80 for example . With universal life policies have age limits of up to age 121 in some cases . There are some Guaranteed Universal LIfe policies that offer lifetime coverage . These are fairly new policies , that just require a set premium be paid for the life of the policy . Whole life depending on the age of the policy will `` endow '' at age 100 or later . At that point the cash value will be greater than the death benefit and the insured gets the cash values . The big thing to remember is that policy end dates are always changing when new insurance plans are created . The big thing is check your policy . An end date will be stated in the body of the policy . This is a multiple answer question , you have to look .
Term Life means life insurance that will end after a certain term , or number of years . E.g. 20 year Term will end after 20 years . It is assumed that the price will stay the same for the entire term , but not every policy 's price is guaranteed to stay the same -LRB- level -RRB- for the entire term . So look at that feature when you pick out your Term policy . Also , Term life does not usually just end when the term ends ; it usually jumps way up in price and then can go up every year after that . If you need to keep the policy for a short time after the term ends , it is possible , but not economically feasible for most people to keep up for very long . When the term ends , most people buy a new policy , if they are able to qualify for one at that time .
Term Life Insurance does not have cash value , but if you get what is called Return of Premium Term -LRB- ROP Term -RRB- , it has a form of cash value . About midway through the term , depending on the policy , it will pay back some of the premiums paid in , IF you cancel the policy . By the end of the term , this type of policy will generally pay back all the premiums you paid in . Some negatives : This cash is not available unless you surrender the policy . If you are table rated , it may be that only the premiums up to standard are paid back to you . The price is substantially higher than regular Term Life Insurance . Some positives : If you bought regular Term Life and invested the extra you would have spent on ROP Term , it could take a return of over 5 % every year on the difference , to earn what you would get back , tax free , by keeping ROP Term to the end . Unlike regular Term , longer terms often cost less than shorter terms , with ROP Term . Finally , getting back all your premiums if you are still alive at the end of the term is a great way to have `` free '' coverage and then get back enough for a final expense fund when the term ends .
Term life insurance is life insurance that covers you for a `` term '' , or temporary period of time . The most common terms are 10 , 15 , 20 , or 30 years . The premium will usually stay the same during the term , then jump up to a very high price at the end of the term . After that , it will continue to go up every year . Some policies simply end when the term ends . Term policies have no cash value . You will not receive any money back -LRB- unless you took ROP term , in which case it would return the premiums you paid in , at the end of the term -RRB- . People buy Term insurance for it 's relatively low price . If you can afford to pay the premiums for Whole Life or Universal Life , you might end up paying less overall , because your premiums can end at some point but your policy can stay in effect . With Term , when you quit paying premiums , your coverage ends . If you have a temporary need , Term can be a great choice .
There is no one set cost to level Term Life Insurance . However , a rule of thumb is , the longer the term , the higher the premium . That is because the insurance companies average out what the policy would cost at your starting age , and the cost of insurance for the ending age of the term policy you chose . If you took out a 10 year Term policy at age 35 , the policy will end -LRB- or the price will go up drastically -RRB- at your age 45 . Mortality rates are not real high at age 45 , so the premium will be relatively low . If you locked that premium in for 30 years , the policy will end at your age 65 , which is when mortality rates are much higher . Therefore , the premium will be higher . However , the premium you have locked in is based on your health at age 35 . And that can make it be a very good deal .
That is a great question ! There are a couple of similarities , and a lot of differences between the two . They are alike in that they can provide a death benefit , should you pass while they are in force . They are alike in that the cost of the insurance rises as the policy ages . They are alike in that they both can end abruptly . Term policies have a designated end date , and to receive the death benefit , you must pass during that term period between policy start and end dates . There is no cash value , or perks , and the price may be set , or it may increase after a guaranteed period , at which point the rates increase . Universal life policies are term policies with whole life characteristics The policy is guaranteed to last a certain number of years -LRB- generally 20 -RRB- , but can end sooner , or last longer , depending upon your payments , and the performance of the policy investments . Term policies generally come with guarantees , UL policies generally come with few . They can grow large cash values , -LRB- and that is the hook that they will use to sell it to you -RRB- but there have to be several things that fall into place for that to happen . In a term policy your greatest risk is that you outlive your policy ; In a UL , it 's that you outlive your policy , and lose what you paid into it . Whole life policies fall right into the middle , and offer the least amount of risk , with the best guarantees , and benefits . Please contact me if you would like to discuss them , okay ? Thanks for asking !
There are three categories of life insurance : Ordinary Insurance , Industrial Insurance , and Group Insurance . When you go to purchase a policy , you are looking for Ordinary Insurance , and it comes in the following types : 1 -RRB- Term Life Insurance This comes in Level term , Increasing Term , and Decreasing Term . But almost all policies sold now are level term , which stay at the same face amount for the full amount of the term . Term Life is temporary coverage that expires at the end of a certain number of years , unless one is able/chooses to renew or convert them . They do not usually have any cash value and if will lapse if premiums get more than a month behind . 2 -RRB- Whole Life Insurance Comes in Straight Whole Life , Limited Pay Whole Life , and Single Premium Whole Life , named after how long one pays the premiums -LRB- the shorter the years one pays the premium , the higher the premium -RRB- . There are also a number of other forms of Whole Life that differ by other features than how long the premium is paid . Whole Life is permanent , stays in effect for one 's `` whole life '' . Has cash value that can be borrowed against or used to pay premiums . If dropped after a certain length of time will have a cash surrender value or can become a reduced paid up policy . 3 -RRB- Endowment Policies Cash values grow rapidly so that the policy endows at maturity and the face amount can be collected , even if still alive . 4 -RRB- Nontraditional Life Insurance Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Interest Sensitive Whole Life , and variable products belong in this category . They all have features that make them different from one another , but all have the ability to provide permanent coverage and have cash value .
What age does disability coverage end ? It will depend on the contract . Disability policies can vary from ending at 65 up to age 75 depending on the carrier and what their contact states for an end date . Some plans reduce benefit or length of payout past age 65 . Depending on the company you choose your payout could go anywhere from 2 years to lifetime .
How long Life Insurance will last depends on the Type of life insurance . Term insurance is designed to last for the length of the Term , -LRB- 1 , 10 , 15 , 20 , 30 years -RRB- , or until the insured dies - whichever comes first . This of course depends on the owner making the premium payments as agreed . If premiums are not paid the policy will lapse and the insurance ends . With Whole Life insurance , -LRB- assuming the premiums are kept current -RRB- , the insurance lasts for the life of the insured up to the age specified in the contract - typically 100 years . When the insured reaches that age the insurance provider will pay the owner the entire value of the policy and the contract ends . SHould the insured die before reaching the `` maturity age '' of the contract , the beneficiary will receive the benefit value of the policy - income tax Free .
AARP does not offer any life insurance - they are only a marketing organization . They associate themselves with certain insurers and allow the carriers to attach their name to a product . For example , life insurance is typically done through New York Life while Medicare Supplement insurance is typically done through United Healthcare . One of my family members who is an AARP member gets letters in the mail frequently for life insurance with the AARP name -LRB- insurance through New York Life -RRB- . However , the coverage is age-banded and only carries the policy through age 80 - the coverage then terminates if they live beyond age 80 with no option to extend the program . Age-banded coverage means the rates change every 5 years as you enter into the next age bracket . They may have other life insurance products available with their name on attached , but that 's what constantly comes in the mail . If you 're looking for term life insurance , I would highly highly highly suggest consulting with an independent agent who can compare multiple carriers for you and discuss your medical history to determine the risk classification each carrier may consider you for -LRB- the risk class directly determines the premiums -RRB- . Shopping before applying is vital ! And there 's no cost to using an independent agent vs. going through a carrier directly . I would n't just buy on name as there are numerous carriers that offer term insurance who offer competitive rates . You can end up spending extra money that you do n't need to when you do that -LRB- that 's not to say a big name carrier would n't in fact be the best cost option , you just want to be sure you 're not overpaying -RRB- . The risk class is key to figure out first and then look at the rates for a given coverage amount/term length from there . If you do n't know what risk class you would likely fall under for a carrier , then a quote is nothing more than a guesstimate . Term life insurance is very straightforward . If you die during the life of the policy , the carrier pays out the death benefit proceeds . If you outlive the term premium guarantee period and and do n't want to pay the annual renewable term rates -LRB- which go up each year as you get older -RRB- , then you would likely either replace it with a new term or permanent life insurance policy or not have any coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You life insurance proceeds will last according to the type of policy you got . If a Term policy , the policy will specify a certain number of years , such as 10 or 20 . When the end of the term comes up , the policy will end or jump up in price to an incredibly high price . If death occurs during the term , the policy proceeds will be paid . If death does not occur during the term , no proceeds are paid . If Whole Life that you have not borrowed against and have made payments according to schedule , the policy will pay out when you die or when it matures -LRB- usually at age 100 -RRB- , whatever comes first . If Universal Life , the proceeds will last for as long as the policy was set up to last , and according to how it is performing . UL usually has a guaranteed no lapse period of a set number of years , as long as premiums are made . If the interest rate goes up , it can last longer .
Yes term insurance ends at a certain age as stated in the policy contract . The age that term policies expire has risen over the years . I have observed over that the age most term insurance policies expire is a couple of years before projected life expectancy . For example when life expectancy was 67 , policies expired at 65 , 76 then 75 , Now most expire at age 85 . Term policies do contain a conversion to permanent insurance before a specified date . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
That is a great question ! There are two basic types of life insurance , one that ends , and one that does n't . The one that ends is called `` term '' insurance . This type of policy is advertised often on TV and in mail by large Senior Citizen friendly companies , and unless you realize that it ends when you turn 80 , can be in for a big , unpleasant surprise . The term policy as a clearly stated end date , has no value if it does n't pay out , and becomes very expensive very quickly if renewed . `` Whole life '' insurance is exactly that - insurance for your whole life . It is more expensive than term life , because as long as you make your payments , it 's going to pay out -LRB- most term policies never do , that 's why they are so cheap -RRB- . If you would like to discuss which one might be best for you , contact me , and I 'll make time for you . Thanks for asking !
No . Term insurance is exactly what its name implies , you a buying protection -LRB- some might say renting it -RRB- against the possibility of death occurring during a specified period of time . Term Life Insurance is the least expensive form of life insurance because of its defined duration and because it does not contain any cash build up provisions . Some life insurance companies `` enhance '' their term life products with an option called `` Return of Premium '' but the policyholder pays extra premium above and beyond the cost of the basic term life insurance policy for this privilege . Essentially you are loaning the insurance company your money interest free for them to invest for 10 , 20 or 30 years while simply returning the original money you paid in at the end of the policy 's term . I wo n't argue whether this is a good or a bad investment of money , many people are lousy savers so this approach would give them some money at some future date . However , if you look at the price difference between a pure term life policy and a term life policy with the same death benefit amount and the Return of Premium feature and you invested that difference in a mutual fund or the stock market over the same time frames I suspect the vast majority of people would end up with more money by going down the investment route . You should definitely discuss this with a financial planner or other impartial advisor before making the decision to purchase term life insurance with or without the return of premium option . As an insurance sales person , I definitely believe in the value of life insurance , both term and permanent . But the commissions earned are higher when we sell you a term life policy with the return of premium provision simply because the premiums are higher . If your agent does n't at least touch on these issues with you , perhaps you should visit with another life insurance agent .
Term Life Insurance is coverage that will pay out if you die before the end of the term . E.g. Let 's say you have 10 year term life insurance and let it go when the term ends , because you do not want to pay the higher premium that begins at year 11 . If you die midway through year 11 , the policy will not pay a death benefit . In contrast to that , Non Term Life Insurance will pay out for as long as it is set up to pay out . Most people select a non term policy that will last their entire lifetime . There are other differences between Term and Non Term -LRB- usually called Permanent -RRB- Life Insurance . Permanent Life Insurance can have cash values , whereas Term Life Insurance almost never has cash values . You can design Permanent Life Insurance to be paid up in a certain number of years , so that you do n't have to bother with paying premiums later in life . Term Life does not have that option . Some Permanent policies are more flexible than Term . As you might expect , the cost of Term Insurance is usually less than is the cost of Non Term Insurance . It can be helpful to discuss your needs with an experienced agent so that you can balance cost with getting the best type of coverage for your needs .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Life Insurance Public Record ?
Not in the sense that anyone can look up your coverage who isnt authorized to do so . The MIB and scripts records are available for authorized access for life insurance due diligence purposes and when applying for life insurance , the proposed insured is required to disclose total coverage . There are privacy protocols in place to ensure , as best one can in an information age , medical and personal financial records , including life insurance .
New York Life is not a publically traded company . New York Life is a mutual company . This means their policyholders are owners of the company versus publically traded on the stock exchange . Some types ofNew York Life whole life policies even allow voting rights and dividends for the policyholders . There are both plus and minus to mutual companies versus publically traded companies .
That is a great question ! With the over fifty attempted repeal tries , and the very public stances against it that the Republican party has , you are certainly right to wonder . But for all of the bluster and rhetoric , here 's what the reality is - the American public does like the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- , as the uninsured rate is the lowest it 's been in decades . The Supreme Court decisions gives the Law solid legal footing . With an election looming , and still stinging from what most in the Republican party thought was going to be a slam-dunk win 4 years ago on a platform of repealing the Act , I think that the wiser leaders of the party know they need to rethink that strategy . As much as they dislike it , the voting electorate does like it , and sadly , many rely on the subsidies to be able to afford their coverage . The adding of Medicaid has progressed slowly but surely , even in the Red States that had spoken out against it , as leaders realize that after the nearly 2 decades of economic pressure , the average American needs the assistance . Even as there seems to be a to tendency to disregard facts in politics , when it comes down to where the votes are coming from , there can be softening or complete reversals of what had been very public stands on issues like health care.With the polling numbers falling solidly in favor of the Act , and the Law being upheld twice in the Supreme Court , I 'd suspect you will hear less talk of repealing the Act . That said , I 'm certain that each candidate will have an opinion on how he or she will change the Law to improve what does n't work as well as it could . There is intense pressure from the insurance companies to regain the incredible profits they were making , and other medical companies also would like to push their agenda 's , so the parts of the law that kept prices low I 'd expect to see attacked . So in short , repealed ? No . Changed ? Probably , depending upon the outcome of the election , and how the public responds to the proposed changes . A great question , and one we in the industry have been watching closely also . Thanks for asking !
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
That is a great question ! I guess the best way to answer it is you say pota-toe , they say pota-tah . Technically , Medicare is public , because it is administered by the Federal Government . But ... they use private insurers to run it . The best way to describe it is that it 's like the way your employer runs their insurance program - it 's public , because it 's offered to all employees and they pay for some of it , but the plans are offered through a private insurance company . The confusion for the public vs. private debate was an attempt by debating politicians to generate confusion , and make things difficult . Since that seems to be what we pay them to do , they were just really doing a good job ! I hope that this helps a little at simplifying the answer for you . If you would like to try to clear this up a little more , please feel free to contact me , I love a challenge ! -LRB- And who better to challenge us than a bunch of politicians ? -RRB- Thanks for asking !
Life insurance proceeds usually pass to a named beneficiary , thus bypassing probate . Property passes a few different ways , such as by deed , title , will -LRB- probate -RRB- , and beneficiary . Since life insurance passes directly to the beneficiary , it is a private transaction and not subject to public records scrutiny . This is a good reason to make sure your beneficiary designation includes a contingent beneficiary , so that the proceeds do n't default to your estate , thus actually becoming a part of the probate process .
Unfortunately , you are looking for a needle in a haystack . Old life insurance policies are personal insurance and are protected by HIPAA and privacy laws and are not public record . You really need good starting information such as the insurance company name , agent or brokers name that sold the policy or an old employer the person may have acquired the policy . The NAIC has a website for lost polices but the odds are very high . If you feel there is life insurance proceeds paid out you may try to Google unclaimed money in that state to see if the proceeds are being held for a beneficiary . Good luck !
The insurance companies look at several factors in determining if they wish to issue the policy for life insurance coverage . You say you are an alcoholic . Are you being treated for kidney problems ? What is your record as far as being arrested for public drunkeness or stopped and issued a DUI citation . Are you able to hold a regular job ? The liklihood that you would be denied coverage with a `` standard '' company is high . There are `` guaranteed issue '' life insurance policies such as `` final expense '' policies that you may find available .
Yes , there is a two year contestable period on life insurance policies . If death occurs during this time , the insurance company will review medical records closely before paying the claim . Some simplified issue companies have a history of not paying claims on a high percent of contestable claims . A small number of companies actually release to the public the percent of contestable claims that they paid last year . As you would expect , those companies pay the highest % of them .
Buy a life insurance policy from an agent that you trust . If you dont have an agent , get a recommendation from a friend , colleague or neighbor . Make sure that you can work with the agent and that the agent accurately records the information that you provide . When the policy is delivered make sure that it is exactly what you ordered . Companies are supervised by your state insurance commissioner and the commissioner is committed to protecting the buying public .
A great deal of information used in an auto quote is automated . The program knows who the drivers are in the household , what cars are registered to the address and the losses and driving records are easily obtained . In California we also get the estimated annual mileage for every vehicle . It is very difficult to manipulate the data as so much is public information .
Life insurance proceeds can go the estate of the insured on purpose or by accident but there is no reason they should . Naming a beneficiary and reviewing periodically is usually the right thing to do . If the estate is the beneficiary , the access of the heirs to any money associated with the life insurance policy is delayed because the money must go through probate . Probate may , in some cases , cause a delay of a year or more . Life insurance proceeds left to the estate , like any asset left to the estate , are forced through the probate process and therefore become part of the public record , so privacy is lost . Perhaps most importantly , in most states , the money paid into probate becomes subject to the claims of creditors of the estate .
Most agents can make an estimate of the cost of a homeowners policy quickly . The more that you know about the home , the better , however , agents also have access to public records that provide a great deal of detailed information about your home . Many agents will do this through email or over the phone . The agent can provide advice about levels of coverage and optional coverages that might be important to you .
Many companies put an Animal Liability Amendatory Endorsement in their homeowners policies . At least one company excludes liability coverage for incidents that result from or arise from owning a dog that is 50 % or more pit bull , Doberman pinscher , or Rottweiler . This exclusion would also apply to any dog in your care , custody or control that has a history of biting as a matter of public record or pervious claims . This endorsement can also limit the coverage for all animal bites .
The best way to be sure that you are selecting the best fit for your needs is to talk to your Insurance Professional . You will need to provide the property location and whatever particulars about the house that you have , including style , year of construction and square footage , as examples . Your insurance professional will use this information , along with other source data from public record , real estate listings and most importantly , an on site visit to complete a reconstruction analysis upon which the recommendation will be based . Talk about deductible options and discounts that can help manage pricing .
It is pretty easy to obtain a quote . Be prepared with the proper address of the property . Pretty detailed information about the house is available in public municipal records , but be prepared tosupply your agent with details : The construction year of the house , where it is in relation to a hydrant or other year round water supply , if the house has special features . Also , tellyour agent if the house has a security alarm.With some companies , it may be beneficial to you if there have been recent upgrades made to the roof , HVAC , plumbing or electrical systems .
When you applied to Social Security to start taking your retirment benefit Social Security would have automatically enrolled you in Part B. I am obviously assuming you are a citizen and that you have 40 quarters of paid in benefits and depending on your when your 65 birthday is . If you have been on disability for 24 months then you would have qualified for both Part A and Part B . If you will type into your browser `` social security administration '' the 800 number shall appear that you can call our fine public servants and have them pull up your records . Just be sure to sit in your easy chair so you can be comfortablewhile you wait for service
Select an agent that you trust . The agent will need the address of the home . He should be able to locate the age , construction , and size of the home from public records . The agent will need to know how the home has been finished . What type of flooring does it have ? Is there paint , wall paper or paneling on the walls ? Has the home been upgraded with a custom kitchen or bathrooms ? Are there pools , sheds , gazebos or a detached garage on the property ? The agent will also need to know if there have been losses in the last few years . Are there smokers in the house ? Then there are a many other questions that will be asked . Additionally , most companies require the application to have pictures of the property .
Long term care insurance is a morbidity product that is underwritten on the basis on medical and behavioral information . Medical information is based on your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . Behavioral information is based on motor vehicle records , vocational and recreational hazards . Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance with the clients around age 50 . But the buying public tends to purchase long term care insurance around age 60 . A couple of considerations here : You want to buy long term care when your healthy an relatively young to afford the premiums . But even if youre healthy , whats the predisposition of your family regarding assisted living and nursing home confinement ? If theres negative health history , then buying long term care earlier may be more prudent .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can Illegal Immigrants Get Private Health Insurance ?
In most cases the answer is no . Most major medical health insurance plans require you to be a US citizen or legal resident . There are some supplemental health insurance plans that do not ask citizenship or residency status . There are also international travel medical plans that do not ask if you are in the US legally .
The short answer is it depends upon the state . One of the most basic principles of insurance is a person/company must have an insurable interest in the property . In order to have an insurable interest in an automobile a person must have a valid drivers license and sometimes a registration . If a state allows an illegal immigrant to obtain a drivers license , then that person can obtain auto insurance . If the person can not obtain a drivers license from that state , he can not obtain auto insurance and even being behind wheel is illegal . Political debates aside , an illegal immigrant should find a state where he/she can register for a drivers license and get auto insurance . This not only benefits them because they will get property and liability coverage , but it will also benefit other drivers because it provides them something to recover from in the case of an accident .
The medicare.gov website states the following : `` Generally , you are eligible for Medicare if you or your spouse worked for at least 10 years in Medicare-covered employment and you are 65 years or older and a citizen or permanent resident of the United States . '' However , millions of dollars have been paid out to illegal immigrants in Medicare benefits . On the other hand , millions of dollars have been paid in to Medicare by illegal immigrants who will be unable to collect Medicare benefits when they turn 65 .
Undocumented immigrants can not get health coverage through the Affordable Healthcare Act . You will not be penalized or fined for not having purchased health insurance . If you are part of a mixed family where one member is a U.S. citizen and may be eligible for the healthcare exchange there are some circumstances where they may be included on the family policy . Undocumented immigrants can get limited services for an emergency medical condition through Medicaid , if they are otherwise eligible for Medicaid in the state . There are private companies who sell health insurance to undocumented immigrants including companies who offer global insurance.The global companies usually require that you have not been in the country more than a year or have a special visa . It is very affordable and good in the states and if you travel outside the country .
There are several life insurance companies that do not ask the citizenship question . Therefore , an illegal immigrant can purchase life insurance regardless of citizenship status . You will need to shop to find those carriers as most mainstream life insurance companies will require citizenship or permanent resident status . In order to purchase life insurance all of the other questions must be answered and there must be reasonable health , means to pay premiums , a need for the life insurance and an insurable interest as a beneficiary . I would recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker to help find those life insurance carriers that do not ask the citizenship question .
No , an illegal immigrant can not purchase life insurance , as far as I know . Life insurance applications usually ask fora Social Security Number , and also ask about about citizenship . Some will only issue to persons that are US citizens , others will accept Green Cards , and others will also accept work visas .
Illegal immigrants may not be the issue here . The issue is more likely life insurance on foreign nationals , which in some circumstances can be achieved . The country of the foreign national is a critical component to consider as each life insurance company has differing rules of engagement with each country .
Most everyone is required to have an approved health insurance plan under Obamacare provisions , but there are exceptions to the mandate . Churches and religious institutions are exempt from the employer mandate . Illegal immigrants , those who are in prison and members of Native American -LRB- American Indian -RRB- tribes are also exempt from the mandate .
Sure can ! In California , many auto insurance companies will offer coverage without regard to your immigration status . We have several carriers that ask absolutely 0 questions pertaining to immigration status so you would be able to purchase the insurance without any worries whatsoever of anybody finding out about your immigration status .
There are many IRS qualifying events that allow you to apply for health insurance after Open Enrollment has expired . You will be eligible for federal subsidies and pre-existing conditions will be covered under this `` special '' enrollment period -LRB- SEP -RRB- . As a health insurance broker with more than 33 years of experience , this topic is very routinely discussed with consumers on a regular basis . Some of the most common `` events '' include : 1 . Exceptional circumstances -LRB- such as natural disasters and medical emergencies -RRB- near the deadline 2 . Getting married -LRB- legally -RRB- 3 . COBRA expiration 4 . Moving to a new location outside the provider network 5 . Birth or adoption 6 . Citizenship change 7 . Losing existing health benefits 8 . Turning age 26 and/or no longer covered on parents policy 9 . Misinformation , misrepresentation , or inaction on the part of entities providing formal enrollment assistance 10 . Enrollment errors due to technical issues 11 . System errors related to immigration status 12 . Display errors on marketplace websites 13 . Getting released from jail 14 . Misinformation about availability of premium tax credits for victims of domestic abuse who are married but not filing a joint tax return
When can individuals enroll after May 1 , 2014 ? Here are the Qualifying Life Events that will allow an individual to purchase health insurance before January 1 , 2015 Loss of minimum essential coverage Marriage , birth , adoption Gain citizenship or qualifying immigration status Enrollment errors by Marketplace Qualified health plan violates its contract Change in eligibility for tax credits and/or cost sharing Move Enrolled in non-qualifying employer coverage Lose employer coverage Student graduates college and loses student health plan
To protect yourself and your family against the financial risk of illness or injury and to finance necessary preventive health care needs . If you are a billionaire you can disregard this advice . If you are a regular American then you disregard it at your own peril . Health care is expensive . I had to answer this question recently for some people who had immigrated to the U.S.A. , were rather young to early middle aged and who had n't had occasion to use much health care in our country yet . So here are a few ball park figures I gave them from a report from 2012 . The average cost of an appendectomy is around $ 13,300 . The average cost of a day in the hospital is over $ 3400 . A normal child birth runs around $ 8000 and a C-section birth can be in the $ 12,000 to $ 13,000 range . And this is just normal run of the mill life events most people will experience at some time . My late cousin lost his 7-year battle with prostate cancer and while he participated in a lot of experimental programs as M.D. Anderson that were either free of heavily subsidized we still loosely estimated that his medical costs that he could track over that period were well in excess of $ 2 million . My niece delivered a premature child at 26 weeks and the child spent another 6 + months in neonatal intensive care , they 've crossed the $ 1 million dollar threshold and the meter is still running as their child will probably require some level of treatment for the rest of his life . Oh , and you need to have health insurance to protect yourself against the individual mandate tax penalty included in ObamaCare . Which in 2015 will be $ 325 or 2 % of your income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- and that will steadily increase in following years . Hopefully this will help answer your question as to why someone would need health insurance .
Guardian Life is one of the most highly ranked life insurance companies among its peers and offers its policy holders one of the strongest balance sheets of any financial institution . It was founded as a mutual company in 1860 by German immigrants and was named Germania Life Insurance Company .
This is a philosophical question that needs to be answered by the moralists of our culture . The Medicare program is actuarially unsustainable at the current population of the U.S. and the anticipated influx of immigrants . It covers most Americans , but means testing is now a discussion point in the debate of all government support programs .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
No , there is nothing illegal about being covered under more than one health insurance policy . And , technically , as long as you were n't double dipping for premium tax subsidies on the government marketplace there is no prohibition on an individual buying more than one health insurance policy . This question most commonly comes up in the context of employer based health insurance plans though . What would be illegal would be trying to make a profit from having multiple health insurance policies . When you complete an application you are supposed to report at time of application or when any subsequent change occurs if you will be covered by other health insurance while you have this policy in effect . This is so the insurance policies can comply with and coordinate the payment status of the claim . In no case should your combined health insurance payouts exceed your paid health claims and thy willoften still be below the total depending upon factors such as state , plan designs , network usage , etc. . It rarely makes financial sense to consider paying for double coverage in health insurance . Maybe if your spouse worked at one of those rare companies that pays 100 % of the Family rate and you work for a company that pays all or most of your employee only cost , then , maybe it makes some sense . If you are concerned about the high deductibles , out-of-pocket maximums and network issues associated with many of todays new health plan designs it would be cheaper to look into supplemental coverage to fill in the gaps than to pay for a second health insurance product that would rarely pay out much in claims .
HIPAA applies to life insurance in that the medical information you share on the application , the results of your paramed exam , and any medical records that are ordered are kept private from anyone except the agency that orders them and the life insurance company that reviews them . Your information is never shared . The Medical Information Bureau does put a code on your MIB to represent any existing health conditions that showed up as a result of your applying for Life Insurance . This is to help prevent multiple fraudulent applications by those who are attempting to use Life Insurance for illegal purposes .
I am presuming that you are asking about tests for illegal drug consumption and not just prescription medications in general . As far as health insurance goes this is a non-issue . An applicant for health insurance is not subjected to any physical exams or blood or urine tests as a condition for being offered health insurance coverage . While in the past there may have been questions regarding illegal drug usage on a health insurance application that if answered truthfully by a drug user could have resulted in their being declined for coverage in the individual health insurance market we have moved past that now . As the Affordable Care Act prohibits medical underwriting and requires policies to be guaranteed to be issued regardless of pre-existing conditions there are no such questions to be answered now . Ironically , in the individual health insurance marketplace the only drug that you can be asked about and perhaps penalized for in the form of higher premiums is for tobacco use . No questions are asked about marijuana , cocaine or other drugs . This is different from applying for life insurance where in many cases a physical exam that may include drawing blood and/or taking a urine sample are part of the underwriting process . With the expanded number of states that have approved marijuana for medical usage and the outright legalization that Colorado and Washington are now experimenting with the life insurance industry is having to adjust to this changing legal environment in their underwriting practices . Different life insurance carriers are addressing the marijuana usage issue in different ways so there is no universal standard being applied to this issue and it is an area where a great deal of evolution is currently underway and probably will be for years to come .
Yes , if however the overdose is an illegal drug and you die within the first two years , there may be a problem . Every Life app has a question regarding illegal drug use . If you answer no to that question and die of an illegal drug overdose within two years , there is a contestable clause . The insurance company will likely investigate to see if you failed to answer that question accurately . If they determine that you lied on the application they do not have to pay the claim , they will simply refund any premiums paid .
Yes , ING Life Companies will test for drugs in the presence of blood or urine in order to issue a life insurance policy . The only way to avoid such testing is to get such a small face amount that no blood or urine test is needed , or to apply for a No Exam life insurance policy that does not do those tests . Even then , they will normally ask about illegal drug use on the application . With some companies , the presence of marijuana in drug tests will not affect the rate too much . If the test shows signs of cocaine , meth or other illegal substances , then the policy would most likely be declined .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Borrow From Veterans Group Life Insurance ?
Unfortunately , Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- is a lifetime renewable Term policy without cash value . Therefore , you would not be able to borrow from Veterans Group Life Insurance because it does not have any cash value or pay any dividends .
In order to borrow from any life insurance policy , it must be a permanent or cash value policy . Unfortunately , group life insurance in almost all cases are term life insurance and have no cash value . Therefore , there is nothing to borrow from , just a death benefit at the insureds death . This is a great lesson as to why people should always purchase and own their own life insurance policy and view group life insurance as a bonus to heir beneficiaries . Very sorry to be the bearer of bad news . Good luck !
The VA offers life insurance for Veterans under certain conditions : 1 -RRB- Those separating from the service may convert their Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- to Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- for 120 days after release from active duty . With a statement of good health this can be extended one year . 2 -RRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -LRB- S-DVI -RRB- provides life insurance to Veterans who have been given a VA rating for a new service-connected disability in the last two years . Totally disabled veterans can get free coverage . 3 -RRB- Disabled Veterans who have qualified for a VA Specially Adapted Housing -LRB- SAH -RRB- grant may obtain Veterans ' Mortgage Life Insurance -LRB- VMLI -RRB- . Unfortunately , the VA does not offer coverage to Veterans who do not meet these parameters .
Unfortunately , Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- is a lifetime renewable Term policy without cash value . Therefore , you would not be able to borrow from Veterans Group Life Insurance because it does not have any cash value or pay any dividends .
In order to get VA Life insurance , someone must meet one these conditions : 1 -RRB- Have converted their SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI -LRB- Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- within 120 days after separating from the Service . This can be extended one year with a statement of good health . 2 -RRB- Have been given a VA rating for a new service related disability incurred in the past two years . This qualifies them for S-DVI -LRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Qualified for VMLI -LRB- Veterans Mortgage Life Insurance -RRB- by virtue of being a disabled veteran who was able to get an SAH grant .
The requirements for receiving VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance recently changed -RRB- . For those retiring from the service before Nov 1 , 2012 , you must apply within 1 year and 120 days from the date you separated from the service . At this point in time , you will need to answer some health questions to be eligible to get the policy . You also need to have been on SGLI while you served , in order to qualify for VGLI . If you retired after Nov 1 , 2012 . you have 240 days to apply for VGLI without answering health questions . If you miss that deadline , you can get VGLI with evidence of good health if you apply within 1 year and 120 days from the date you separated from the service . Again , you must be on SGLI at the time you left the service , in order to qualify for VGLI . Others who can get VGLI are the Individual Ready Reserve or Inactive National Guard . If you do not fit any of these categories , or do not wish to go that route , veterans can get an individual policy from private companies . Some of the health conditions that , unfortunately , can hit veterans disproportionately high are hepatitis , PTSD , diabetes , and others . Going to a company that specializes in any health conditions you might have will be a big help .
When servicemembers separate from the service , they have the opportunity to convert their SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- . However , it must be done within a short time . If a veteran is looking for life insurance after some years of being out of the service , there is not a VA policy especially for them , but they can get private life insurance as can anyone of that age group .
Unless a service person gets Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- within a year from separating from the service , their Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- will end and they will need to get a private policy . Contact an agency or website that carries several products to choose from to find the best rate for Veteran 's life insurance .
There is life insurance for veterans provided by the VA called VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- . However , it must be purchased shortly after separation from the service . If getting a private policy , a veteran can get any life insurance policy that anyone else can get , as long and age and health guidelines are met .
To apply for Veterans Life Insurance , you can go to the benefits.va.gov website . However , keep in mind that you must apply for VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- shortly after departing from the service . You are only qualified for VGLI by converting SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- to it within a certain time frame .
If you have a health condition that makes it difficult to get life insurance elsewhere , you have recently separated from the service , and are eligible to get Veterans Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- without having to answer medical questions , I think VGLI is a very good deal . If you are very healthy and able to get similar rates elsewhere , I would advise to lock in your premium for a longer period of time than Veterans Group Life Insurance locks them in . However , since the rate reduction in 2008 , VGLI premiums are good and it may be hard to beat them . You might want to purchase a permanent policy elsewhere along with taking VGLI Term to cover all your life insurance bases .
The VA does offer life insurance for Veterans , but there are narrow guidelines as to who can get it . If you are currently retiring from active service , you must apply to change your SGLI to VGLI within 120 days -LRB- you can wait one year longer with evidence of good health -RRB- . You can also get Veterans Group Life Insurance if you are a member of the Individual Ready Reserve or Inactive National Guard , or were disabled as a result of such service .
Im not sure if there is any free coverage . If there is it is a small amount . But all members of the military are eligible for subsidized coverage through the Department of Veterans Affairs . The program is called SGLI -LRB- Service-members Group Life Insurance -RRB- . It is super cheap and all members of the military should take advantage of it . It is a flat rate regardless of age/tobacco use/health . $ 400k costs $ 27/m When you retire you can convert it to the veterans group life plan . WEBSITELINK
A veteran needs Long Term Care Insurance if he/she does not want to utilize long term health care provided by the Veterans Administration . This may be due to location or some other bias the veteran has about receiving VA medical care . Or a veteran might want Long Term Care Insurance in case he/she can not qualify for full benefits or full compensation for care offered by the VA. .
The military offers their own group life insurance policy called SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- . Servicemembers are automatically issued $ 400,000 of life insurance at a very reasonable cost , but they can choose to take a lower amount , or decline it altogether . Upon leaving the service , they can convert it to VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- if they do so within a certain time frame .
A veteran who is no longer in active service can purchase the same life insurance as anyone else , based on age and health requirements . There is also military life insurance for veterans , but it has strict conditions -LRB- you can see those by searching on the word `` veteran '' on this website -RRB- .
Unfortunately , veterans do not get any life insurance unless they have met certain conditions . These are the major ones : 1 -RRB- Before Nov , 2012 - You must have been receiving SGLI and applied for VGLI -LRB- Veterans Group Life Insurance -RRB- within 120 days of separating from the service , or you have a year and 120 days to apply if you can show good health . 2 -RRB- After Nov , 2012 - Same as above but substitute 240 days for 120 days 3 -RRB- You are a member of the Individual Ready Reserve Unit or Inactive National Guard . If you are eligible for VGLI you can get up to $ 400,000 or the amount that you had in SGLI , whichever is lower .
No . The employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 50 or more full-time/full-time equivalent employees . So , if your company has 20 full time employees and 6 part-time employees that probably translates into the equivalent of 23 full time employees and places you well below the threshold where you have to provide employee health insurance or be subject to the employer mandate tax penalty . If you need to attract and retain quality employees and reduce turnover then it may well be in your self interest as a small business to offer group health insurance to your employees . However , with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act 's health insurance marketplaces and premium tax subsidies to help persons between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level purchase individual health insurance the small business owner 's decision in this regard is more complicated now . If your workforce is largely lower income and you are asking or would be asking your employees to pay a significant portion of the cost of group health insurance it is possible you are actually doing your employees and their dependents a disservice by providing group health insurance as this effectively blocks them from purchasing subsidized individual health insurance in the government health insurance marketplaces . There is some analysis required and business philosophy decisions to be made by the small business owner in making the decision as to whether offering group health insurance is the best course of action in todays environment . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance broker who is well educated on the Affordable Care Act to help you make this decision . I am a 30 year industry veteran and Chartered Benefit Consultant , if I can be of assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me .
Servicemans Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- is a federal program . It replaced a program instituted during World War II that proved to be one of the best benefits servicemen could have . SGLI is available to all service personnel but ceases when they leave active duty . Veterans group Life insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- is a similar , however , more costly program for servicemen who have left active duty .
VGLI stand for Veterans Group Life Insurance and is life insurance for persons who have served in the uniformed services . It is Term life insurance that can go up in price at regular intervals . Neither SGLI or VGLI is available in Whole Life and can not be converted to Whole Life . To get permanent coverage you would want to purchase a private policy .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Get Health Insurance Under Obamacare ?
Obamacare health insurance is available through `` Open Enrollments . '' You can compare rates and apply online through one of our websites or , if you dare , the . gov website . No medical questions are asked and the new Obamacare federal subsidy could actually pay most or all of your premium -LRB- if you qualify -RRB- . There are four `` Metal '' plans and an additional `` catastrophic '' category for younger persons .
Obamacare is working well in California . Obamacare was intended to help Americans who could not previously afford health insurance get insured . People with bad health -LRB- heart disease , obesity , cancer -RRB- often were denied coverage or charged a very high premium . Now these folks are charged the same rate as everyone else . People with low income were often priced out of the insurance market as well . It was not reasonable to expect a person making $ 25,000 a year to spend 15 % of their income on health insurance . Under ObamaCare people making under $ 48,000 per year are eligible for premium assistance . WEBSITELINK - In this video I show you how a 30 year old earning $ 25,000 per year can get a policy for just $ 18 per month .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
No , not really . If you are talking about the individual health insurance market then your freedom of movement has been severely restricted by the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . So , outside of the annual open enrollment period each year you can only change your health insurance coverage if you experience a change of life status event or special election period as defined under ObamaCare . Some examples are getting married or divorced , having a child or moving to another state or outside your current carrier 's service area in your state . Similar restrictions apply if you are covered under a group health plan that offers multiple options or one of the new private health insurance exchanges that some companies are moving to . An increasingly common situation that many consumers are being or will be faced with is finding out that their favorite physician is no longer participating in the provider network of the health insurance plan they enrolled in . Cancelling your coverage to switch to a new insurance carrier in mid-year that does have your doctor as an in-network provider wo n't meet the criteria for a change of life status event or a special election period . You could cancel your old coverage but you would have to wait until the next open enrollment period and the first of the year to get new individual health insurance . Failure to pay your monthly insurance premium is also not a qualifying event and can leave you out in the cold until the next enrollment period so do n't think about that as a strategy to change insurance carriers in mid-stream . While this was tied into a continuation of coverage under COBRA issue , I recently witnessed a heartbreaking example of this situation . I received a frantic call from the girlfriend of a man who has terminal cancer . At first she was unsure as to his last day of being covered under his employer 's plan and whether he had continued his coverage under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . In fact , the initial information she gave me was that he had not continued his group coverage and was still within the 60-day window that a person has to purchase individual coverage after losing their employer based coverage . If this had been the case , even though the man was being treated for terminal cancer I would have been able to enroll him in major medical coverage that would have had to cover his care immediately . After digging into this man 's situation more deeply we discovered that he had elected to continue his coverage under his former employer 's plan , had paid the first month 's premium by check but had then failed to make his second month 's premium payment and had his COBRA coverage cancelled due to non-payment . The fact that this man was undergoing intensive chemo & radiation therapy and being given massive doses of pain medications made it understandable as to how he missed making that second premium payment but that did n't stop the COBRA plan administrator from terminating him for non-payment . Unfortunately , as cancellation of coverage for non-payment of premium is not a qualifying event the individual major medical carriers were within their rights to decline him for coverage until the next open enrollment period and coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . This has left the man uninsured at the worst possible time and has his friends and family raising money for his care . If he is still alive by the first of the year I 'll be able to get him coverage but his life expectancy is not that great but the bills he is accumulating are .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
No . ObamaCare is a name that has become attached to a law passed in 2010 called the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -LRB- PPACA -RRB- , it is also sometimes referred to as the `` Affordable Care Act '' . This legislation was a centerpiece of the Obama administration 's political agenda and it significantly re-engineered the health insurance industry through such actions as making policies guaranteed to be issued , eliminating pre-existing condition exclusions and limitations , requiring that all policies cover certain `` Minimum Essential Benefits '' and creating Federal or State run health insurance marketplaces to facilitate the purchasing of health insurance and perhaps subsidizing the cost of health insurance policies for people below 400 % of the Federal Poverty Line . ObamaCare itself provides no health insurance coverage . That is still a function of health insurance companies now operating under the requirements of ObamaCare .
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
No . You are making the mistake that many people are making in thinking that ObamaCare is an insurance plan , it is not . ObamaCare or the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -LRB- as that is its true title -RRB- is a massive law accompanied by an even more massive set of administrative guidelines that set new rules for how health insurance plans are offered , priced , structured . Plus it did create the online government health insurance marketplaces -LRB- e.g. - HealthCare.gov -RRB- as a supposedly simpler way for people to purchase individual health insurance and possibly receive subsidies for the cost of their health insurance . ObamaCare is in no way a government health insurance program such as Medicaid or Medicare .
An employer can not discriminate against an employee based upon their age -LRB- among a multitude of other factors -RRB- . However , that does not necessarily mean that an older employee who compares what they are contributing towards their employer based health insurance with a younger co-worker of the same coverage level will find themselves paying the same amount . This may initially be perceived by the older employee as though they are being discriminated against but this is almost certainly not the case . If your employer 's group health insurance rates are age based rates then there is a different rate for each year of age for a covered employee . The community rating requirements of ObamaCare have pushed many health insurance carriers towards this age rated basis though some health insurance carriers still develop a `` composite '' rate for a group after quoting them on an age rated basis -LRB- composite rates are one rate for every employee with Employee Only , Employee + Spouse , Employee + Child -LRB- ren -RRB- or Family coverage regardless of the employee 's age -RRB- . This is how things work under community rating . First of all , there can be no more than a 3 to 1 ratio between the rates for the youngest and oldest employees in the group . To keep things simple let 's say the monthly rate for a 25 year old is $ 200 per month then the monthly rate for a 60 year old would be $ 600 per month . Then let 's say that your employer pays 50 % of the employee only rate which leaves the other 50 % for the employee to pay . Under this scenario the 25 year old 's cost would be $ 100 per month -LRB- $ 200 x 50 % -RRB- and the 60 year old 's share would be $ 300 per month -LRB- $ 600 x 50 % -RRB- . Even though the dollar amount paid by each employee differs significantly the employer is treating them the same in that the employer is contributing the same percentage amount towards each employee 's coverage . Therefore , there is no discrimination . This is one of the effects of ObamaCare that is increasingly being seen by employees as their old health insurance plans and rate structures are being replaced by ObamaCare compliant plans and the new community rating method .
Applying for individual health insurance under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is no longer something a person is necessarily free to do whenever they choose . In the largest sense , ObamaCare envisions the overwhelming number of individual health insurance enrollments to occur during the designated annual open enrollment period . This year the open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 . So , depending upon your personal circumstances you may not even be able to apply for individual health insurance until then for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . If you have experienced a change of life status event during this year -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , loss of employer based coverage , aging off of parent 's plan -RRB- then you have 60-days after that event to enroll in individual health insurance coverage . It sounds like you would be well served to seek the services of an experienced health insurance agent who can help you determine if you might qualify for any premium subsidy and whether your health insurance needs would best be met by insurance carriers and products either inside the government health insurance marketplaces or in the traditional health insurance marketplace . Of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov or check out some other Internet based insurance shopping services but I do raise a note of caution about this to the normal health insurance consumer . The health care reform law has made understanding and comparing health insurance benefits , coverage and provider networks more complicated than ever and it is an environment that is still evolving . Getting some professional guidance is n't going to cost you anymore and it will provide you the assurance that you understand what you are buying and why .
Obamacare -LRB- Affordable Care Act -RRB- is available to most persons under the age of 65 that have household income below Medicaid-eligibility levels . The easiest way to get Obamacare coverage is through an experienced broker and their top-rated website . That 's our specialty . You may qualify for a federal tax subsidy that drastically reduces your premium during Open Enrollment . Off-Exchange plans can also be discussed . Obamacare is here and a free quote takes only a few minutes . You might be shocked to learn how affordable rates are .
Can everyone get health insurance ? Well , soon we will find out in 2014 . The quesiton will be can we afford it ? Prior to Obamacare , health insurance was the domain of states to set the rules for insurance . Some states have very good consumer oriented insurance laws and others really do n't . I live in a state where anybody who wants health insurance can get it , granted you still have to pay for it , but you can get coverage . My state actually adopted the Clinton Plan and fixed it to where it works and works well . Obamacare will have a lesser impact in my state than others , because we already were doing many of the things in Obamacare .
Let us begin by being clear on what ObamaCare is not . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- a.k.a. - ObamaCare -RRB- does not in itself provide insurance to anyone . ObamaCare is a bureaucratic & administrative structure that imposes requirements on the private health insurance system and , where accepted by state governments , expands the eligibility range for qualifying for Medicaid . It is funded through government appropriations channeled through several departments of the government -LRB- Health & Human Services , IRS , DOL , etc. -RRB- , a wide range of new taxes -LRB- tanning salons , medical devices , taxes on Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans , taxes on health insurance companies , increased Medicare Part A tax on high income wage earners are few examples -RRB- , changes to existing tax breaks -LRB- reducing the FSA deduction from $ 3500/yr to $ 2500/yr and eliminating the eligibility of over the counter drugs from coverage under FSA plans -RRB- , a $ 63 per employee per year fee assessed on group health insurance plans , the eventual employer mandate and individual mandate tax penalties for non-compliance , reductions in the amount of out of pocket medical expenses you can deduct from your personal income taxes -LRB- threshold increased from 7.5 % to 10 % of income to qualify for a deduction -RRB- , fees -LRB- insurance companies have to pay for the privilege of selling their products in the government marketplaces -RRB- , and $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over the next decade was shifted over to help fund Obamacare . This is not a total listing but hits many of the essential high points of where the money is supposed to be coming from .
Yes , but it is a matter of timing . You are asking this question at the end of July , 2014 . If you are looking for individual health insurance and you somehow missed the first ObamaCare open enrollment period that ended on March 31st , 2014 then you are probably out of luck until the next open enrollment period beginning on November 15th for an effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . As an individual you no longer have the freedom of being able to purchase individual health insurance whenever you feel like it . That is one of the tradeoffs involved with ObamaCare doing away with medical underwriting , adjusting rates for risk , applying pre-existing condition limitations or exclusions , or denying coverage . There are some exceptions to my statement above . These are called `` Change of Life Status Events '' with marriage , divorce , having a child , and losing your group health insurance coverage being common examples . If you are getting a new job and will be becoming eligible for coverage under your new employer 's group health insurance plan then you will become eligible for health insurance coverage at the end of your employer 's probationary/waiting period . That time period can vary from employer to employer and you should be or have been advised by the HR department or business owner as to what that time period is . Under the terms of the health care reform law your waiting period should be no longer than 90 calendar days from your date of hire .
Obamacare is a law that dictates how health insurance plans are to be designed for individuals and businesses . If you are not covered under an employer plan you will be required to purchase an `` approved '' plan from a private insurance carrier . Low income people may qualify for Medicaid which is a `` free '' health insurance plan jointly funded with federal and state taxpayer dollars . In a sense , your Medicaid plan could be considered an Obamacare health insurance plan but that is not technically correct .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is Covered Under Short Term Disability Insurance ?
Short Term Disability covers things like childbirth , broken bones , chemotherapy , and other situations that would cause someone to be off of work for a short time -LRB- generally under 6 months , but short term disability can last up to two years -RRB- . For conditions that are likely to drag on for years , Long Term Disability Insurance takes over .
Sickness and injuries are often covered under a short term disability policy but the specifics vary by company . If you have existing coverage then review the policy for information on what is covered . If you are looking for a new policy , talk to an agent and determine exactly what is covered .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Short term disability insurance is paycheck protection in case of a disability event . And many consumers can only afford short term disability versus long term disability coverage . Mutual of Omaha is a major carrier in short term disability insurance . Keep in mind that you may have short term disability insurance through your employers group benefit plan . You also have Social Security disability insurance , although benefits may be limited .
Short Term disability Insurance pays a percentage of your salary if you become temporarily disabled , meaning that you are not able to work for a short period of time due to a sickness or injury -LRB- excluding on-the-job-injuries , which are covered by workers compensation insurance -RRB- . A typical short-term disability insurance policy provides you with 40 to 65 percent of your pre-disability base salary , according to the Life and Health Insurance Foundation for Education . The National Association of Insurance Commissioners estimates that these benefits generally last between three to six months . Most short-term disability insurance policies have a `` cap '' , meaning you receive a maximum benefit amount per month . Short-term disability insurance policies also have a limit on the amount of times that you can receive benefits-up to two years , according to the Insurance Information Institute . .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
Aflac offers short term disability insurance through employer sponsored plans , only . Aflac does not sell individual short term disability plans to individuals . Their short term disability plans must be paid for by worksite premium payroll deduction . There are only a couple of companies that offer individual short term disability insurance . Many more offer individual long term care disability insurance .
There is a huge inventory of disability insurance companies that carry short term disability and some short term disability group plans for business . Before purchasing short term disability insurance , make sure your employer does n't offer it . Here are a few on short term disability companies that come to mind Mutual of Omaha , Aflac , Lincoln Financial Group .
Under your current situation I would not carry the old disability policy . Disability insurance is a coordinated product in the sense that any number of policies will not pay more than the maximum scheduled amount usually no greater than 70 % The only reason to carry two different disability insurance policies is if you purchase a short term and a long term disability insurance policy . The long term policy may have an extended elimination period of 90 days or 180 days before benefits commence . A short term disability plan can commence within in days and pay benefits up to the elimination period of the long term plan . What you are describing sounds like two long term disability plan and would not make financial sense to keep the other policy .
Short term disability insurance pays a percentage of your salary for a specified amount of time if you are ill or injured and can not perform the duties of your occupation . Please note , you may be required to use up your sick days -LRB- if applicable -RRB- before your short term disability coverage will start making payments . If you have short term coverage , you may want to consider supplementing it with long termdisabilityinsurance as many people who need to use their short term disability coverage will often be unable to work for longer than the short term plan allows . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your disability insurance program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , AFLAC does have disability insurance in their portfolio of supplementary insurance products . Most commonly people are offered AFLAC coverage through their place of employment though consumers can go directly to AFLAC for coverage . There are two types of disability insurance ; Short Term and Long Term Disability . The general industry standard is that a short term disability plan pays benefits for up to 6-months and long term policies cover much longer periods of disability . AFLAC takes more of a hybrid approach in their disability product that gives an individual options that can extend beyond the time period normally associated with short term disability policies but at the same time not going as far as most long term disability policies will cover . Disability insurance can be very important as we have about a 1 out 3 chance of being disabled for some period during our working years . However , not all disability insurance policies are created equal or offer the same value propositions . The convenience of buying at the workplace and paying through payroll deduction can be very attractive , this is no guarantee though that it is really the best fit for your individual needs . If you are serious about insuring your paycheck you would be well served to explore both AFLAC and other options you can obtain in the marketplace . Also , just because your employer allows an AFLAC agent to come into your workplace and sell you insurance does n't mean that your employer has gone through any process of determining if these products are a good value for you . The reason is that you are paying for it with your money so it 's a `` let the buyer beware '' situation and is totally different than the process your employer goes through when looking for group health insurance for their employees . In that case the employer is financially involved and they go through an extensive shopping and comparison process before deciding on the best health insurance option to offer their employees . This is not to say that AFLAC does not have good products or that they have n't helped many customers over the years - they have . But , at the same time , massive advertising and branding campaigns combined with very aggressive sales tactics are no guarantee of being the best value .
If you have to make a choice between long term disability insurance and short term disability insurance , most people will pick long term disability insurance . More companies offer long term disability insurance , so their premiums are more competitive . Also , most people can financially survive a short time off of work , but would be in trouble if they were to become disabled for a longer period . Long term disability insurance can cover you from a couple of years to retirement age . In my opinion , long term disability insurance is the type you should get .
Disability insurance is offered as short term disability , generally two years , and long term disability , generally to age 65 . The elimination or waiting period needs to be established on the basis of your cash reserves . And keep in mind that many employer sponsored group plans include short term disability coverage . Having short term disability coverage may allow you to purchase long term disability coverage with a longer elimination period .
Before shopping for short term disability insurance , first determine if your employer 's group benefit plan offers it . If your an executive or key person in the company , you may ask for short term disability insurance to be added to your compensation package . Short term disability benefits usually is designed for two years . Short term disability is paycheck protection against illness or injury recovery .
Short Term Disability covers things like childbirth , broken bones , chemotherapy , and other situations that would cause someone to be off of work for a short time -LRB- generally under 6 months , but short term disability can last up to two years -RRB- . For conditions that are likely to drag on for years , Long Term Disability Insurance takes over .
Short or long term disability has an elimination period that must be satisfied before benefits are paid out . On long term disability , the elimination period can be as short as 30 days and as long as two years . Depending on your employee benefits at work , you may have short term disability . Depending on the coverage , some use their short term disability benefits as a supplement or as an elimination period .
To get Disability Insurance to cover normal pregnancy , you need Short Term Disability . Most people get this type of policy paid for through their work , or are offered a group short term policy that they can pay for on their own . If purchasing an individual short term disability policy , you must apply for it before you are pregnant . Long term disability insurance will cover pregnancy that involves complications .
Short Term Disability is used to replace approx 40-70 % of your salary if disabled for a `` short '' period of time . Most short term disabilities last from 3-6 months , although the cap can be as high as two years . The coverage may kick in as soon as the disability is determined , or there may be a waiting period . If purchasing your own policy , the higher the premium you pay , the shorter the waiting period . Some of the uses for short term disability are partial income replacement in case of pregnancy , muscle strains , broken bones , pneumonia , heart attack , or chemotherapy treatments .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Can You Make Selling Life Insurance ?
The average life insurance agent makes be around $ 50,000 on life insurance sales a year . There are a segment of the sales force that makes between $ 75,000 and $ 100,000 a year . Less than 1 % make over those numbers day in and day out . Selling life insurance successfully is based on the law of large numbers .
The average life insurance agent makes around $ 40,000 per year . But selling life insurance is like owning your own business . There is no limit and there is no safety net at the bottom either . Most people who get into life insurance never make it past one year . A very few make a whole lot of money . How much one person makes has nothing to do with how much another person will make .
Most full time seasoned life insurance agents make $ 50,000 from exclusively selling life insurance . The more affluent life insurance agent can make in excess of $ 100,000 annually from the sale of life insurance . The elite Top of the Table and Court of the Table members make in excess of $ 250,000 annually selling life insurance .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Can I sell my life insurance policy ? Well , number one , a life insurance policy is personal property . Could you sell it ? I think you can , usually through the life settlement market . But keep in mind that the original reason that you sold the life insurance was not to sell it for that specific purpose and most carriers and life insurance companies are going to take a dim view on you trying to buy insurance for just the purpose of selling it . But if the reason you bought life insurance does n't exist any longer , you could go ahead and sell it on the secondary market of life insurance settlement , and you can sell it for cash . Generally , a cash value contract is going to get a little bit more than what you have in your policy ; sometimes a lot more , depending upon the death benefit and your timeline . Can you sell it ? You could sell it and again , I recommend make sure that you 're doing this for the right reasons . And make sure that your coverage is no longer necessary .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
The average life insurance agent makes around $ 40,000 per year . But selling life insurance is like owning your own business . There is no limit and there is no safety net at the bottom either . Most people who get into life insurance never make it past one year . A very few make a whole lot of money . How much one person makes has nothing to do with how much another person will make .
That is a great question ! Insurance companies make profits much like banks do . They make money off of the products that they sell - all of the policies or annuities will have fees attached to them , that they can profit from . They also make money off the investments that they make while holding your money . They invest in things , just like we do . They can also make money by selling off or buying corporate assets , or divisions , much like corporations do . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
Life insurance is not hard to sell . It 's actually very easy to sell . When you 're selling life insurance the main part of your job is prospecting for the right people . You are looking for the people who are aware that they need life insurance . Think of it this way . If you were selling swimming pools it would be very hard to sell them to 90 % of the people . But if you talked only to people who own homes , had yards and been thinking about buying a swimming pool it would be pretty easy to sell them . Selling life insurance is the same way . It 's very easy to sell to the right people and it 's impossible to sell to the wrong people .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can make a ton of money selling life insurance . $ 1 million per year . More . A lot more . Of course , a number of factors have to fall into place . Here is my list of those factors that can fuel your propulsion toward making that kind of money : Dedicate yourself to selling life insurance . If you treat it as an ordinary job , then it wont be worth the aggravation . Treat it as the noble profession it is . There is virtue in making sure that the widows and orphans among us are self-sufficient , and dont have to ask for handouts . Commit to being the nicest person you can be . You are , after all , helping people face their own mortality . Be sensitive about that . Take a zen approach to selling : the sale you dont desire is the sale you will get . Should you want the sale ? Sure . Do you need the sale ? Sure . But perspective is essential . In the big scheme of things , this is only a sale . Dont get too attached to it . Become a true expert . Establish yourself as the go-to guy for this product . When somebody has a question about life insurance , your opinion should have the most authority . Specialize . Every other financial professional wants to be a jack of all trades and master of none . But let me ask you this : if you were willing to spend $ 100,000 on your own life insurance policy , would you hire a true specialist or at a mere generalist to get the job done right for you ? To drive home the point : lets suppose you wanted to spend $ 1 million on a new mansion . Would you hire a master builder , or a plumber that had also expanded into construction work ? Integrity , integrity , integrity . Your word should be gold . When you give somebody a quote , they should get approved at that rate . Period . View yourself as an elite producer . Why shouldnt you land a big fish on a regular basis ? If you really have put in the work to make yourself a master of your trade , then those big cases should come to you . Build a great organization . Make sure you can deliver superior service throughout every stage of the life insurance purchasing process . Open your own brokerage , or affiliate with good distributors . Or put together some hybrid of both . Lead a normal life . Too many salesmen divorce their wives and marry their business . Wrong priorities . And take the best care of yourself . Make yourself physically strong and mentally tough , and you will have the endurance needed to succeed . Big time . Ready - set - change . The world is shifting in all different directions . If you chart the right path , you can keep up with it . More than that , you can make it work for you . When I started in this business , I developed a local clientele . I saw every client personally , and was armed with a rate sheet and a few computer printouts . Two appointments , then a sale . All over the kitchen table or business counter . Now I do business across the country , and engage people through email , social media , and cell phones . Lots of ways to connect , to educate , to serve . Its taken some time to get used to the newest ways of doing business . But you know what ? If you let your traditional values guide you in your use of new technology , you will be a winner . Many times over . Just keep finding ways to keep the customer satisfied . Stay connected and build strong relationships . Keep educating , and keep serving . People should be able to find you on their desktop , on their laptop , and in their cell phone . Make it easy for them to tell you whats on their mind . To tell you their problems . So you can solve them . You will get many clients that way , and a lot of them will spend a lot of money on life insurance .
How many insurance policies can you have ? You can have as many as insurance companies will sell you . While first thought is unlimited for most , actually insurance companies check and see how much insurance you have in place , how much you 're applying for with them and other companies and make a decision based on what they find . It is not an unlimited option .
It depends on individual or family circumstance . A better question is how much life insurance is enough ? Remember one reason for Life Insurance is income replacement . Having enough life insurance to ensure a family is protected is usually the best place to start . A term life insurance contract typically provides a large death benefit with a low premium payment . Provide peace of mind knowing your family will be protected then decide if and how much Whole Life Insurance is enough . The term Whole Life means you will be paying premiums your entire , or `` Whole '' life . Having too much Whole Life Insurance might be an issue if the primary breadwinner loses his or her job and can no longer afford making premium payments . This is where Whole Life can be costly . When considering the purchase of Whole Life Insurance it is a long term , risk adverse strategy . Make sure you are able to make premium payments for at least 10 to 12 years regardless of job loss , increase in expenses , etc. . All the risk is transferred to the insurance carrier and the interest crediting provides a guarantee . Plus there is usually a ` dividend ' or return or premium . The only thing the insured needs to do is make sure they make the premium payments . There is no flexibility with these premiums , like Universal Life Insurance . It generally takes a long time to build cash value . For standard products and level premium schedules the break even point for premiums paid equaling cash value accumulation is generally 10-12 years . Always ask your agent questions if you are unsure of how life insurance products work .
You can make good money selling life insurance , or you can make no money selling life insurance . Those who are really good at it tend to attract more and more clients , and do exceptionally well . On the other hand , those who struggle tend to move on fairly quickly , because it can be a brutal industry if you are not doing well . Most people are paid by commission only , and expenses can easily eat up profits . When there is a split in commissions , the pie often seems too small . Most insurance sales people fall somewhere in the middle and make a decent living at selling life insurance . With some good breaks , they have years where they make good money . And if you like what you are doing , that can be a worthwhile career .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and today 's question is : is selling my life insurance policy a good option for cash ? Well , it is an option for cash , and if you 've owned it for over two years or more , there 's probably a little bit easier way to sell that . It is personal property . You do own it , and I say if your reason for having life insurance still exists , you need to keep it , but if your reason for life insurance , why you bought it , has no longer existing then you may want to look at it about cash . There are several companies out there that will buy your policy depending upon how much you 've put into , your age , and your actual life expectancy . That 's how much you 're going to get for that policy . Is it an option ? Is it personal property for you to sell ? It is , and you should look at this as a last resort , as a backstop for cash reserves in your portfolio . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Well it all depends on the company they work for . But most agents make a small amount of money selling an auto policy . They count on the Renewals to run there agency . you can always ask your agent how much he will make selling your auto insurance . But typically its betten % 5 - % 10 of the policy premium .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Life Insurance Payout For Drug Overdose ?
If the drug overdose was due to suicidal intentions within the first two years of the life insurance policy , the policy would not pay out . After two years , it would most likely pay the death benefit even if the reason for the drug overdose was to commit suicide . An exception would be if the insured person had a drug problem that was not admitted where requested on the life insurance application , and if death occurred within two years of the policy going into effect . Again , after two years , the policy would most likely pay even if the drug use/abuse was not admitted on the application .
If during the first two years of a life insurance policy , the life insurance company will check to see if the overdose was due to suicide . They will also check to see if there was a drug problem that was not noted on the application . If past drug history was lied about or omitted , the policy will not pay the claim within the first two years of the policy . If the application was filled out honestly : 1 -RRB- If the drug overdose was accidental , the policy will pay , even within the first two years . 2 -RRB- If the drug overdose was suicide after two years , the policy will pay . 3 -RRB- If the drug overdose was due to a drug habit picked up after getting the policy , the policy will pay . 4 -RRB- If the drug overdose was due to mental illness contracted after getting the policy , the policy will pay . There may be some caveats in some policies , but the above is how life insurance generally works . If you disclosed everything and your life changes later , the policy pays with the exception of suicide in the first two years .
does life insurance payout for accidental overdose ? After two years -LRB- one year in some states -RRB- without question `` YES '' . Prior to that , during the contestability period , an insurance carrier has the right to research the insureds drug history to see if compares to what has been stated on the application . If their is a history of drug abuse and overdosing in the prior history of the insured , the claim will be contested . If there is no history , no recorded history , the claim will most likely be paid .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Does life insurance cover drug overdose ? Remember , during the contestability of a contract during the first two years , if somebody actually overdosed on drugs and that can be quantified as suicide , most carriers will not pay the death claim . If this is an accidental drug overdose , whether by prescription or whether by street drugs , then if it 's just a normal death claim , it should pay the claim . But keep in mind , this is going to be highly investigated during the first two years . So if death occurs and drug overdose is involved , you 're going to go through an investigation process to determine under their due diligence process whether this was suicide or not . So just keep in mind when you 're looking at a question like this you 're saying , When did it occur and under what circumstances did it occur ?
Yes , life insurance does cover accidental overdose . If the policy was purchased less than two years prior to the overdose , the insurance company will investigate to see if it was truly accidental . And if the overdose was due to items not disclosed on the life insurance application such as illegal drug use , dementia , depression , or medication , the life insurance company may contest the policy . For policies over two years old and policies that offered full disclosure , accidental overdose is a covered event .
If the drug overdose was due to suicidal intentions within the first two years of the life insurance policy , the policy would not pay out . After two years , it would most likely pay the death benefit even if the reason for the drug overdose was to commit suicide . An exception would be if the insured person had a drug problem that was not admitted where requested on the life insurance application , and if death occurred within two years of the policy going into effect . Again , after two years , the policy would most likely pay even if the drug use/abuse was not admitted on the application .
If it is due to an accidental overdose reaction to a prescription drug the policy would pay . If it is due to an overdose of an illegal drug the company would investigate the history of drug use and if it was found you lied on an application they would probably refuse the claim . Usually the claim would be refused since it would be hard to prove that the deceased was not taking illegal drugs prior to issue of the policy . After two years the policy would pay regardless as has been stated .
Yes , if however the overdose is an illegal drug and you die within the first two years , there may be a problem . Every Life app has a question regarding illegal drug use . If you answer no to that question and die of an illegal drug overdose within two years , there is a contestable clause . The insurance company will likely investigate to see if you failed to answer that question accurately . If they determine that you lied on the application they do not have to pay the claim , they will simply refund any premiums paid .
If the insured overdosed in the first two years of the contract issue date , it may be investigated as a possible suicide or a non-disclosure issue where drug use was not disclosed . Non-disclosure of a prescription or illegal drug use after the two year contestability may be characterized as a form of fraud , which could place the death claim in jeopardy . If this was accidental drug overdose the odds are high that the issuing carrier would pay the death claim . Consult an attorney for further information on this scenario .
Life insurance will cover an overdose if the overdose was not due to suicide during the first two years . If there was an undisclosed drug , alcohol , or mental health problem when the applicant filled out the life insurance application , and if death occurred during the first two years of the policy , the death benefit could be contested . If everything on the application was forthcoming , there should not be a problem .
Life insurance will cover death by drug overdose . During the first two years of the policy , the life insurance company will not pay the death benefit if suicide occurred , or if death was due to something that was omitted or lied about on the application . Most life insurance applications do ask if you have had drug treatment , or crime related to drug usage , at least in the past few years . But if you were honest on the application , and after the first two years , the policy would most likely pay for drug overdose in any circumstance .
If your death was caused by an overdose of illegal drugs it will definitely pay the death claim if the policy was over 2-years old . If the policy was less than 2-years old , it will be contestible and the insurance company will determine if the overdose was accidental or considered sucide . If it was sucide , they will not pay the claim on a policy that was in force less than 24-months .
I 'm sure Michael Jackson 's insurance covered his death by overdose . And I 'm sure if Elvis Presley had life insurance his death by overdose was covered . So the answer is : as long as the overdose that resulted in death occurred after two years of implementing the policy , yes it should be covered . If the overdose occurred within two years of implementing the policy it may have to be proved that it was not intentional suicide .
If you are applying for life insurance and cocaine , meth , heroin , or other harmful drugs are found in your blood and/or urine sample , your policy will most likely be declined . However , if you have a life insurance policy that you got in the past , and did not lie or omit anything on that application , then died of a drug overdose , the policy will most likely pay out .
If the policy was obtained legally -LRB- i.e. the applicant did not lie or omit facts about past drug use -RRB- and was not a result of suicide during the first two years of the policy , the life insurance policy will most likely pay for death due to drug overdose .
Life insurance will pay for accidental overdose . If death occurs during the contestable part of the policy -LRB- the first two years -RRB- , the life insurance company will review the application , underwriting , and medical records to make sure that a drug problem was not hidden at the time the deceased person applied for life insurance . If it is found that the Insured person did not admit substance abuse or diagnosed mental instability when applying for insurance , the policy claim could be denied . However , if lying or omission did not occur , the benefit should be paid .
Life insurance pays for death by any reason except suicide in the first two years and some obscure other causes -LRB- e.g. death caused while committing a crime or perhaps an exclusion for death caused while flying as a pilot -RRB- . So if the drug overdose was suicide and it occurred during the first two years of the policy , the life insurance policy will not pay . For all other situations . the life insurance policy should pay as long the application was filled out honestly .
That is a great question ! The answer is yes , it is , unless the death is a result of overdosing on illegal narcotics , and your policy is one of those that state they do not pay for death resulting from the commission of a crime . They may also contest if the questions that ask about drug and alcohol use/abuse are deemed to have been falsified . In every other case , provided that the death occurred outside of the contestability period , there should be no issues . Thanks for asking !
It 's going to depend `` when '' . Most life insurance policies include a two year contestability clause that allows an insurance carrier to contest payment on a claim if it occurs within that two year window . After twoyears any cause of death is covered without queston , so even an overdose , accidental or intentional would be covered .
Yes . If your Life insurance policy has been in force for 2 years or more the policy will pay out for any cause of death . If the policy is less than 2 years old as long as the application was answered truthfully and there was no fraud the policy will still pay out for an accidental overdose .
end question
start question
annuities
Can Annuities Be Willed ?
Annuities are contracts . They identify a beneficiary to receive proceeds in the case of a premature death . The company is required to honor the beneficiary . If the beneficiary is the estate , or there is no surviving beneficiary , then the will can direct the disposition of the proceeds . Most of the time people who purchase annuities name living persons who survive them .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
Annuity companies are required to invest the majority of their portfolios in bonds . They do have flexibility to invest in bonds that are rated high or low . If a high-grade bond is AAA rated , it will provide a lower return to the annuity company . If the annuity company is willing to invest in lower rated bonds , the return will be high because of the increased risk . Annuity companies also have the flexibility to invest in bonds with different maturity schedules . This can have an impact on your annuity renewal rate based on when you purchased your annuity and the timing as the bond market moves up and down over time . Annuity rates have recently dropped and while nobody has a crystal ball to know exactly where rates are going , here 's an approach you can think about and see if it addresses your concern . You can use what is called a `` ladder '' approach . Take the total amount of what you intend to put into an annuity and split it into 3 or 4 pieces . Purchase one annuity now with 1/3 or 1/4 of your total amount . Wait one or two years and do the same with the next 1/3 or 1/4 . Using this strategy can be effective during a time when annuity rates will be climbing . Of course , if annuity rates drop , it can work the other way . Remember , you always have the option not to purchase a 2nd or 3rd annuity if the interest rates are not to your liking . Using the laddered approach does leave the question as to what you do with the remaining funds during your `` wait and see '' time . That lost time can be a drawback if you 're just going to let your money sit in a bank CD which typically earns only a fraction of what an annuity can provide . Speak with a qualified retirement income professional that can look at your particular situation and help determine the best course of action for you .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
In Canada annuities there are two main types of annuities : accumulation annuities and payout annuities . If they are issued by an insurance company they can/do include maturity & death benefit guarantees , potential creditor proofing , estate bypass -LRB- privacy and costs -RRB- and more . They are used extensively by retirement and estate planners . The topic of annuities with all our industry jargon is indeed confusing . Experience has taught me that an understanding the basics is the key step . 1 . An accumulation annuity is as the name suggests is used to save money , a payout annuity option is included as part of the contract . There are two main types of accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- - principle is guaranteed and interest is earned similar to a GIC Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIF -RRB- - similar to a mutual fund , the principle is at risk , however , with maturity and death benefit guarantees , etc. . In Canada , they are also referred to a segregated funds or variable annuities . 2 . Payout Annuities , you exchange a sum of money for a flow of income . There are many variations with different guarantees but the basic two types are : Annuity certain , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for a specified number of years . Life annuity , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for the rest of your life or with a joint life . These are usually purchased with a guarantee payment period . The more guarantees , the lower the income . To understand an annuity , first understand a mortgage . With a mortgage you receive a lump sum of money and pay back principal and interest over a specified term until the balance is zero . With a payout annuity certain you are at the opposite side of the equation , you exchange a lump sum of money for a guaranteed income stream for a specified term . You will find 16 `` I want to ... How do I '' , that illustrates some strategies using annuities on www.jpw.ca Annuity strategies can be complicated . It is your money and you would be prudent work a life insurance broker with a professional designation like a CLU -LRB- Chartered Life Underwriter -RRB- or a CFP -LRB- Certified Financial Planner -RRB- . If you have further questions please contact me . Paul
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
What are annuities ? Well as simply as possible , Annuities are investment products offered through insurance companies . There are different kinds of annuities , some for building balances and others for spending balances of money . The building balances form of annuity is invested and grows tax deferred over time . This is known as the accumulation phase . Depending on your choice of accumulation annuity you can have little risk to significant risk on return . Reducing your investment risk usually also means reducing your investment return . Accumulation annuities can offer a larger range of risk and return options along with tax deferral . When you decide to spend or distribute savings through an annuity , it is called an immediate annuity and begins a systematic series of regular payouts over your lifetime . An immediate annuity is know as a product that you `` ca n't outlive '' as it will pay you as long as you live . And , depending on the payout you choose , can guarantee that if you pass early , the payouts will continue to a beneficiary of your choosing for a set number of years or until all of your contributed funds are spent . An immediate annuity now offers a variety of payout options and really should be considered as part of a retirement portfolio . They provide a constant steady stream of income that will last as long as you do and if you choose an option will keep pace with inflation over time .
The main risk people face with fixed annuities is the buying power of the payments you receive because they do not have a cost of living adjustment -LRB- COLA -RRB- built in . Annuities offering COLAs are available , but generally require a higher premium to account for the increase in payments . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
When you say retirement annuity , I guess you are referring to an annuity that pays an income monthly ? With that being said , the annuity that you are referring to is called an immediate annuity . Immediate annuities come in many variations of length of income streams . Typically an annuity to fund retirement would be a life only with survivor benefits . Basically this annuity will pay a monthly income for as long as a Annuitant is alive and then either 100 % or as low as 50 % to a survivor , normally a spouse for the rest of their life . There are many different types of annuities however . One annuity in particular is an Indexed annuity with an income rider . This would be an alternative to the immediate annuity .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Why Is My Car Insurance Deductible So High ?
Your deductible for your auto insurance is typically selected by you . The deductible amount can affect your auto insurance premiums greatly . The higher the deductible amount typically the lessor your premium . If you currently have your auto insurance coverage through a high risk carrier they may require higher deductibles .
First , let me say I am not an accountant or tax expert at all . This questions would be best answered by a Certified Public Account or other tax pro . I can only speak to my personal situation . For years we did n't have a group plan through my company and I had individual/familycoverage that I paid for out of pocket . I also have family members who have some health issues that included specialists , a lot of RX drugs , etc. . Simply due to the cost of the health coverage , we had to go with a high deductible health plan as well . So , over the course of a year we would have our health premiums , high deductibles , plus a bunch of specialist costs that were not even covered by our insurance . This generated a ton of dollars that came out of my pocket personally . There is a threshold for medical expences -LRB- I do n't remember what it is -RRB- where anything over an above that figure is deductible on your tax return . I have been well over that figure every year for the last 5 or 6 , so I have been able to deduct a good amount of my out of pocket expence . This is just my personal situation and again , I am not a tax professional of any sort . All this was done on the advice of my personal accountant . I would highly recomend you contact a tax professional and discuss your individual situation with them .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
A tough question to answer because it is so subjective , what 's high to one person may quite acceptable to another . As 30 year insurance industry professional I would say that by the standards of 2014 , you are entering `` high deductible '' territory when your plan 's annual deductible exceeds $ 2000 for an individual . When many consumers hear the term high deductible it is often being used as another way of saying this is a health insurance plan designed to work with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . The model for this product being that the lower premiums for a high deductible health insurance plan with no copayment features will free up money to fund an HSA and hopefullyaccumulate a health care nest egg for a person 's retirement years . In 2014 the minimum deductible for an HSA based plan is $ 1250 and the maximum deductible is $ 6350 . With the advent of the Affordable Care Act 's -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- health insurance marketplaces in 2014 the consumer is now presented with a whole new array of health insurance plan designs that will certainly meet anyone 's definition of a high deductible plan but that may not be designed to be compatible with an HSA . Extra care and caution needs to be exercised by the consumer in the new world of health insurance and I would recommend seeking out the services of an experienced health insurance brokers in your marketplace to help you find the plan best suited to your needs and budget .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Well , Yes and No . You can always deduct your individual health insurance premiums on your Schedule A , Itemized Deductions , on your income tax form along with other eligible medical expenses . The catch is -LRB- there always is one is n't there ? -RRB- that you have to itemize your deductions -LRB- which you are probably doing as a self-employed person -RRB- and that thanks to ObamaCare your total deductible medical expenses now have to exceed 10 % of your income before you receive any tax benefit . This is generally a pretty high bar to clear for most self-employed people and so the net effect for most self-employed persons is that they receive little or no tax benefit . But as some politicians seem to like to point out , you did n't really build your business . So , why should you get a tax break ? And someone has to pay the taxes to provide for the subsidies for other people 's health insurance or Medicaid coverage . We all know that everyone who owns a business is rich so why not you ?
What happens when your term life insurance ends ? What will happen is this : you will take out your checkbook , remember what your premium used to be , breathe heavy sigh , and then make your check payable for a much larger amount . In my career I have seen renewal premiums literally 10 times the original rate . Yes , 10 times . Doesnt always happen , but it does happen . And you will not know how high the increase will be until you get your renewal notice . They dont tell you in advance . Why would an insurance company slam you on the renewal ? Several factors could be involved . One is that they are a little bit concerned about their reserves . They need to bulk up . Another could be that they feel the credit market is a little bit tight . So they need to store up some money in case they cant go out and get enough new money . Perhaps they feel the whole block of term business is not profitable . Maybe there is a big fat insurance company lurking in the wings ready to buy them , and they consider the term business to be a liability . So they will jack up the rates to get rid of a lot of policies . -LRB- To tell you the truth , I need to learn a little bit more about this last reason myself . Most people keep paying term premiums , dont die , and then drop their policies anyway . So the insurance company has received a bunch of money without paying any out . Why not keep the renewal rates more reasonable to hold onto these customers ? -RRB- But the net result of these high renewals is that the only people who hold on to their policies are people who really need the coverage , and feel they have no other option . They feel that their medical history or lifestyle risks would make them ineligible for coverage , or make a new policy too expensive . The fact of the matter , though , is that they may indeed qualify for a better rate elsewhere . They should get prequalified and really see what the market has to offer . They may very well be surprised . And if they dont get a better deal , then the term conversion rider in their policy may be an option . As long as they are not over the maximum conversion age , they could lock into permanent rates . And they dont have to convert the entire face amount at once : it could be done in stages , to better manage cash flow . Thanks for asking . Want to learn more ? Review my blog at planrisklive.com .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
That is a great question ! Very simply put , probably so . While the Affordable care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- has done a good job of slowing healthcare costs from rising double digit increases to low single digit increases , the damage has been done . The high costs to employers of providing their share of the costs eats into their profits , and sadly the prevailing sentiment seems to be profits are more important than employees in far too many cases . As that is the case , what we are seeing is a shift from the employer taking the risk of paying to the employee . This has been the case with retirement accounts , there are very few companies that pay pensions anymore , most have moved to employee managed 401k 's or IRA accounts . The same with health care - they still offer it , but to keep costs low , they offer plans that have low costs , and high deductibles . The good companies will make HSA 's -LRB- Health Savings Accounts -RRB- available to you -LRB- they allow you to deduct money from your check and deposit it in an interest bearing account for future medical expenses , and can only be used with high deductible plans -RRB- to kind of balance them out . So my best guess is unless there is a change in employer love for profit , or a dramatic drop in health care costs , we 've pretty much set ourselves on a path of high deductible health care plans . Thanks for asking such a good question !
Why is whole life good ? Well there have been several answers that will cover the bases pretty well . A locked in premium , tax deferred growth , a death benefit that grows over time , etc. . Let me give you another reason . a reason that you may not realize until later in life if something happens to you but does n't kill you . That 's right people get sick . Diabetes , high blood pressure , heart problems and so on can and actually do happen to a large segment of our population . The reason I want to point out pertains to the things I just mentioned . Why is whole life good ? Because they ca n't take it away from you . YOU control the policy . The price ca n't go up , the policy ca n't really run out of years and end prematurely . Why is that important ? When I got sick with my type II , hyper tension and recently AFIB , what a reassurance it was to KNOW I was still in control of my policies , that they were n't going to end or explode in price on me . Whole life is expensive because it 's a product the INSURED controls . Cheers .
Every year , make and model of automobile that a particular company is willing to insure has a symbol that determines the rating factors that are going to be applied . The symbol is the result of company experience and industry experience . If a car has a history of high repair costs it will be assigned a high symbol , regardless of the appearance or name you give the vehicle . Cars with low weight and high horsepower -LRB- sports cars -RRB- generally have high repair costs and a high symbol . Cars with expensive parts can also be assigned a high symbol .
This really depends on your definition of `` Good '' . For this discussion , I 'll assume you mean low cost . Now , I 'll also preface my answer by saying that `` low cost '' is different than `` cheap '' . I 'll never recommend cutting important coverage to save a few dollars . There are ways to help reduce the cost without cutting those coverages . The important coverages to which I refer are the Bodily Injury , Property Damage , Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverages . These could save you from a lifetime of payments or wage garnishments if you 're ever sued because of a car accident . So , that leaves the physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- and , possibly , personal injury protection . Collision : This covers your car from damage because of an accident . There are two types I will define here . Broad Form means that you 'll only pay your deductible if you 're substantially at fault in an accident . Regular means you pay your deductible either way . As you can probably assume , regular will cost less and , in my opinion , should be what everyone carries . Comprehensive : Covers your car from damage that is `` not a collision '' For these two coverages , increasing your deductible lowers the premium . I usually recommend at least a $ 500 deductible for collision . For comprehensive , the difference between a $ 100 and a $ 500 deductible is n't very much so I usually recommend a $ 100 deductible . Personal Injury Protection pays for your medical bills and lost wages if you 're hurt in a car accident . If your health insurance will pay primary for a car accident , you can save a little bit of money by having them pay first . Do n't skimp on the liability coverages . They 're the smallest cost with the greatest potential for saving your bacon . Getting these coverages right will only cost you a few dollars a month . Be smart , find an agent you can trust , and take their advice . You 'll be happy and save money in the long run .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
That is a great question ! In insurance , the deductible is the amount that you have to pay before the insurance company starts paying . Generally the higher the deductible -LRB- your responsibility -RRB- the lower the premium that you will have to pay . If you are a safe driver , and do not have much risk for an accident , then a high deductible might save you a ton of money over the life of your policy . If you have a high deductible on your health insurance , and have frequent health issues requiring doctors visits , a high deductible might be a more expensive way to go . The best thing to do is to balance out your risk tolerance and ability to come up with the deductible with the affordability to safely make your payments . Have your agent run a couple of examples for you with different deductibles so you can see the difference in the premiums . Thanks for asking !
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
HDHP stands for High Deductible Health Plan . Generally , this term has been used in association with a type of health insurance policy purchased that was specifically designed to be used with a Health Savings Account -LRB- H.S.A -RRB- . In this context the health insurance plan design has an upfront deductible that must be paid by the policyholder before any co-insurance cost sharing and/or copayments can be applied to the policy 's coverage . The IRS determines the minimum deductible and out-of-pocket maximums for H.S.A eligible high deductible health plans each year . For this reason the deductible associated with HDHPs changes over time . In 2014 the minimum individual deductible for a HDHP is $ 1250 , in 2015 it will increase to $ 1300 . Re-designs of health insurance plan benefits prompted by the Affordable Care Act have introduced new health insurance plans that have substantially higher deductibles that previously were most often associated with an H.S.A based plans . As such , the consumer must closely examine the detailed benefits summary of the health insurance plans they are considering . This is because there are plan designs now that certainly have a high deductible but they also have other benefit features like office visit or prescription copayments that disqualify them from being used with an H.S.A. . In short , you will be best served to seek out the services of a health insurance broker who is knowledgeable in these matters .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Does Elimination Period Mean For Disability Insurance ?
The elimination period is chosen at the time of application for the DI policy and represents a kind of `` time deductible '' that must be fulfilled before a claim is paid . The clock starts ticking when the carrier is informed in writing by a medical professional that the insured person has suffered a debilitating accident , developed a medical condition , or contracted a serious illness that is likely to last longer than the elimination period chosen . Thefirst dayof fulfillment of the elimination period typically begins at the date-of-onset of the debilitating event , although that actual date-of-onset is subject to the decision of the insurance company after reviewing medical records . Claims , i.e. a check for the maximum monthly benefit for income replacement , would usually not arrive until 30 days after the completion of the elimination period . For example , say the injured or sick insured has a 90-day elimination period . The income replacement check would arrive 30 days later , or 120 days from the date-of-onset . In the meantime , the insured would be responsible for paying bills during that four month period . So , serious discussion needs to take place at application time about how long of an elimination period should be applied for understanding that reality . The insured shouldmake sure that a liquid asset account be available at all times for such expenses , and/or a short-term DI policy should be in place , and/or a sufficient amount of sick leave and vacation be saved up , or a combination of all those accommodations .
Elimination period for Disability Insurance is the amount of time that passes between the event of suffering a disabling injury or illness , and the time when benefits begin to be paid to the disabled person . The elimination period is chosen as a feature when taking out a Disability Insurance policy . The shorter the elimination period , the higher the premium usually runs .
Similar to disability income insurance , long-term care insurance has an `` elimination period '' . This is like a `` time deductible '' during which one has to pay out-of-pocket for care costs while satisfying the elimination period . Elimination periods are chosen by the applicant and are usually 30 - , 60 - , 90 - , 180 - , or 365-days . The longer the elimination period , the lower the premium.Some carriers provide a 0-day elimination period for home care , either as part of the policy or as an extra-cost add-on rider . If a person goes on claim at home , they may receive approved claim payments -LRB- reimbursement plan -RRB- or cash -LRB- indemnity plan -RRB- as soon as they are declared eligible for payment by the carrier . The contract indicates what the insured needs to submit to the carrier in order to be approved for payment of care costs or to receive a cash payout.There are two ways an elimination period may be satisfied : - Service Days . The insured must pay for care on any given day in order to satisfy one day of the elimination period . For example , the insured has chosen a 90 day elimination period . The insured must pay for long-term care services out-of-pocket for a total of 90 days -LRB- they do not have to be consecutive -RRB- before the elimination period is satisfied . If the person is paying for home care , satisfying the elimination period could take longer than 90 consecutive days if care is not needed on any given day or days . Carriers may have different ways of calculating the fulfillment of the elimination period using the `` service days '' method . - Calendar days . The elimination period is satisfied when a majority of days during the elimination period required care and the insured paid out of pocket . In other words , the insured does not have satisfy the elimination period with days where services were paid out of pocket . Each carrier defines how the elimination period is satisfied using the calendar day method . This method is often offered as an additional cost rider.If a person goes immediately into a full-service nursing facility , the elimination period will be fulfilled as care is received . All facility care will need to be paid out-of-pocket by the insured or the insured 's family during that period of time . It wo n't matter that much which type of elimination fulfillment method is used in such a case unless the person leaves the facility before the elimination period is fully satisfied.Some carriers do not offer a calendar day method for satisfying the elimination period . Some have a choice between the two . Some carriers only have a calendar day elimination period . Once the elimination period is satisfied in full , it does not have to be satisfied again . Since the way a carrier allows for the fulfillment of the elimination period can be the difference in hundreds - if not thousands - of dollars in out-of-pocket payments , the prospect for long-term care insurance should make this a priority question before choosing a carrier . Be sure that you read the section of a specimen or sample policy on `` Payment of Claims '' so that you understand how the proposed insurance company defines `` when long-term insurance kicks in '' .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
I am not sure what you mean by `` functions '' . Disability insurance is designed to pay a percentage of your income , usually between 60 % and 80 % if you become disabled due to an injury or accident . You choose an elimination period which acts as a deductible . The elimination period is the period of time that goes by after you become disabled before the insurance begins to pay . The longer the elimination period the lower the premium . Each company has options as far as the elimination period , most common for Short Term disability might seven days sickness and zero days accident but this can vary according to circumstances . Short Term disability will provide income for the period of time specified in the policy , usually not more than a year or two , but again , that varies .
Long term disability begins after satisfying the policy elimination period . Every policy is different . The elimination period describes the length of time you must be disabled and under the care of a physician , before benefit payments begin . You choose the elimination period at time of purchase . Short elimination periods have higher premiums , than longer elimination periods . Check your policy to determine what elimination period fit your budget .
The terms of purchasing long term disability that you should be familiar with are these . Elimination period is the time between you are diagnosed by a doctor that you are medically disabled and the time you begin to receive benefits . The most common elimination periods are 30-60-90-180-360 days . The rule of thumb is the longer the elimination period the lower your premiums . Most good disability insurance carriers do go back and pay you from the first day of disability once the elimination period has been satisfied in a lump sum amount . Benefit period is another term to be familiar with as well . This is the period in which benefits will be paid to you once they commence . Common benefit periods are 2 years , 5 years , 10 years , 20 years or age 65 and 67 years old . I would recommend choosing the age versus years . If you are permanently disabled at a young age , you do not want to lose your benefits before becoming eligible for social security . The last term is future purchase options . This allows you to purchase more disability as your income increases without proof of insurability . In other words , you will not be reunderwritten . During your work life you will probably earn more money because of your increase knowledge and skills . This option allows you to insure that aspect .
The elimination period on disability insurance is the specified period from which the disability is medically diagnosed and the insured is eligible to start receiving benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower the premiums . On short term disability insurance plans elimination periods can be as little as days or weeks . On long term disability plans can vary from 30-45-60-90-180-360 days . Most good disability plans do go back to day one and pay the entire period once the elimination period has been met in a lump sum .
Just a quick note as I read another post and need to clarify an incorrect statement regarding elimination periods . YOU are NOT reimbursed for your choice of elimination period . If you choose a 60 day elimination period , your benefits start on the 61st day and payment is usually made on the 91st day and monthly there after . You are not compensated for your choice of elimination period . The elimination period is like choosing your deductible on your health , home or auto insurance . It is the time you are willing to self insure your situation . You are not compensated for your choice of elimination period . Your choice of elimination period effects your premiums .
It depends on the carrier . Some carriers do not treat normal pregnancy as a sickness that keeps a woman from working and do not replace income during a normal pregnancy . However , to fully answer the question , request a `` specimen policy '' from the carrier you may beconsidering to find out the exact contract language aboutthe replacement of incomeduring pregnancy . Here is a typical treatment of normal pregnancy from a highly-reputable carrier for DI : `` If the Elimination Period for Your Disability Benefit is less than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are not covered Sicknesses . However , if the Elimination Period is equal to or greater than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are covered Sicknesses subject to the definition of Disability . '' Now , one has to refer to this carrier 's specific definition of disability in the specimen policy : `` During the Your Occupation Period * you are not able to perform with reasonable continuity the substantial and material acts necessary to perform your occupation in the usual and customary way and you choose not to work at any occupation . After the Your Occupation Period You are not able to engage with reasonable continuity in any occupation in which you could reasonably be expected to perform satisfactorily in light of your age , education , training , experience , station in life , and physical and mental capacity . '' * Insurance-speak for the occupation you are in when you become disabled ; you pick the period of this part of the definition of disability when you apply , typically 2 years up to age-67 . The longer the your occupation period , the higher the premium . Thats because the risk to the company is higher to replace income for a longer period of time due to the fact that the choice to work in another position or not during this period is yours . The key to the question is : does your condition of pregnancy restrict you from working ? The insurance carrier will want to know that from your doctor before they will start the clock on the elimination period -LRB- 90 days -RRB- , after the fulfillment of which you will start to get income replacement checks . If you add a `` partial disability rider ' , usually at extra cost , you might not have to be `` totally '' unable to work in your occupation to get a pro-rated replacement of income as you work part-time . Again , refer to the specimen policy .
If you are looking at purchasing disability insurance , the premiums are based on a few things such as occupation , health , benefit amount & elimination period . You can lower the premium by lowering the monthly benefit amount & are choosing a long elimination period which means the waiting period before the benefit is paid . You can use an elimination period of 30 , 60 , 90 & 180 days . The long the elimination period the lower the premium .
Long Term Disability Insurance will start paying the benefit to the disabled employee after the waiting period -LRB- elimination period -RRB- has been satisfied . The most common elimination period chosen for Long Term Disability Insurance is 3 months , but it can be shorter or longer . The shorter the elimination period , the lower the premium . The countdown for the waiting period usually starts on the day of the injury or illness , but if a minor illness has developed into a major one , the elimination period might not start to be satisfied until that progression has taken place . Each policy will spell out that criteria to review ahead of time .
The elimination period for Disability Insurance is the amount of time between the event of becoming disabled , and the time when the benefit starts being received . People choose elimination periods based on their budget -LRB- the longer the elimination period , the lower the policy premium -RRB- and on the funds they have saved up -LRB- if someone does not have over one month of income in savings , it would be wise to get a Disability Insurance policy with a one month or less elimination period -RRB- .
The elimination period for Disability Insurance is the waiting period between the time the disability occurs , and the time the insurance benefit begins to be paid . The elimination period is one of the variables of a Disability Insurance policy that can be adjusted to lower premiums -LRB- by making the elimination period longer -RRB- . If the applicant has very little savings on hand , they may want to pay more premium and buy a policy with a shorter elimination period .
This is a very common question and the answer is that it depends on the carrier and its definition of total disability . Normal pregnancy is not considered a disability by some carriers . In fact , it is clearly excluded from coverage in the contract . For others , as long as it falls into their definition of what constitutes a total disability , they will replace income after the elimination period is satisfied . The definition of disability is key . A typical definitionmight be something like `` the inability to perform the usual and customary duties of the occupation -LRB- job -RRB- in which the insured is working at the beginning of a disabling event ... '' A less favorable definition would add the words , `` and is unable to work in any other occupation . '' Since many women are able to performthe primary duties of their occupation during the first two trimesters of a normal pregnancy , some carriers do not automatically consider a leave for pregnancy a trigger point to replace income . And , if they do , 90 days is a typical elimination period - a kind of `` time deductible '' before one qualifies for benefits - most women would probably not satisfy the elimination period before the baby was born anyway . If there were complications resulting from pregnancy , then that 's a whole different situation , and if they started to occur early enough in the pregnancy and did qualify under the definition of disability , the elimination period would theoretically start sooner and benefits might be paid out before birth . If you are beginning a new job and think you might become pregnant or intend to become pregnant during the time you are employed with that company , be sure to ask Human Resources if the company provides disability insurance as a group benefit and if the coverage includes normal pregnancy .
When calculating your disability insurance amount you must take into account a few factors . The first factor is how much money you will need to draw every month in case of a total disability whether it is from an illness or an injury . Most plans will limit your maximum monthly benefit to 70 % of current income and most will reduce your benefit when you become eligible for SSI which is the federal disability program through the US government . Next factor to consider will be how long can you live without drawing a monthly benefit ? This is the elimination period . An elimination period can be 30-60-90-180-360 days before you begin to receive benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower your monthly premiums . If you find you need benefits in less time than 30 days , it may be necessary to purchase a short term disability plan as well as a long term disability plan . The last factor to consider is the benefit period or how long you need benefits to pay in case of a total disability . Benefit periods can be as short as 2 years or can reach out to age 67 years old with many options in between . I highly recommend using an independent experienced disability broker to help you build the proper coverage for your unique situation at the best price possible .
The elimination period in Disability Insurance is the period of time between becoming disabled and when benefits begin to be paid to the disabled employee . With Long Term Disability , a period of one to six months is usually selected as the elimination period . Generally , the shorter the elimination period , the higher the premium paid for the policy .
The elimination period is chosen at the time of application for the DI policy and represents a kind of `` time deductible '' that must be fulfilled before a claim is paid . The clock starts ticking when the carrier is informed in writing by a medical professional that the insured person has suffered a debilitating accident , developed a medical condition , or contracted a serious illness that is likely to last longer than the elimination period chosen . Thefirst dayof fulfillment of the elimination period typically begins at the date-of-onset of the debilitating event , although that actual date-of-onset is subject to the decision of the insurance company after reviewing medical records . Claims , i.e. a check for the maximum monthly benefit for income replacement , would usually not arrive until 30 days after the completion of the elimination period . For example , say the injured or sick insured has a 90-day elimination period . The income replacement check would arrive 30 days later , or 120 days from the date-of-onset . In the meantime , the insured would be responsible for paying bills during that four month period . So , serious discussion needs to take place at application time about how long of an elimination period should be applied for understanding that reality . The insured shouldmake sure that a liquid asset account be available at all times for such expenses , and/or a short-term DI policy should be in place , and/or a sufficient amount of sick leave and vacation be saved up , or a combination of all those accommodations .
What is elimination period in long term care insurance ? The elimination period is the amount of time you choose to self insure the situation before the long term care insurance kicks in to cover costs . The elimination period gives you options about how soon your long term care kicks in . The shorter the elimination period , the higher the premium . If you can extend your elimination period , usually you 'll see a considerable reduction in cost .
Having just come off a long period of disability with some health issues , I can answer this . Disability insurance covers your working income . It does not cover investment income , rents or other things you may generate income from . The nice thing is they do n't count those things against you either . To collect on any disability plan you must meet their definition of disability . Do you have provisions for partial disability ? You can have a claim that starts as partial and morphs into total and visa versa . I also want to make sure as it is misstated in another post , you are NOT paid for time spent in your elimination period . That is considered the time you were `` self insured '' and is reflected by a lower premium . You are NOT repaid for this time spent . Actual payments begin at the end of the first 30 days after the elimination period is met . So with a 90 day elimination period , you would receive your first income check on or about day 120 .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Is VA Life Insurance ?
VA Life Insurance rates are posted here : WEBSITELINK The Veterans Administration offers Term Life Insurance that goes up in price every five years , according to the age of the Insured . This chart shows the rates for $ 10,000 to $ 400,000 of coverage at every age .
Yes , Medicare can be secondary to VA. . The two do not work together ; the VA only covers services provided at VA facilities and Medicare does not cover care provided at VA facilities . But if the VA approves care outside their providers , Medicare might cover it . As far as drug coverage goes , VA drug coverage does not have a premium and covers most or more than the drugs covered for Medicare Part D so there may not be a need for both plans if the VA is your primary provider .
Yes , you can have VA and Medicare . However , in order to use health care benefits provided by the VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- , you must receive your health care at a VA facility . Medicare does not cover services provided by a VA facility . Medicare benefits can be a good supplement to VA benefits though , covering what the VA does not cover .
Yes , you can have both Medicare and VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- benefits . But in order to use VA benefits , you must get care at a VA facility . And Medicare does not cover services provided by a VA facility . So they are not altogether compatible . But VA benefits can be a good supplement for what Medicare does not cover , such as prescription drugs .
The VA offers life insurance for Veterans under certain conditions : 1 -RRB- Those separating from the service may convert their Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- to Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- for 120 days after release from active duty . With a statement of good health this can be extended one year . 2 -RRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -LRB- S-DVI -RRB- provides life insurance to Veterans who have been given a VA rating for a new service-connected disability in the last two years . Totally disabled veterans can get free coverage . 3 -RRB- Disabled Veterans who have qualified for a VA Specially Adapted Housing -LRB- SAH -RRB- grant may obtain Veterans ' Mortgage Life Insurance -LRB- VMLI -RRB- . Unfortunately , the VA does not offer coverage to Veterans who do not meet these parameters .
The VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- requires that you receive care at their facilities and with their providers in order to receive VA benefits . Thus , the VA does not accept Medicare , as Medicare only works with Medicare approved facilities and providers . Many veterans use Medicare for their major medical expenses but use VA benefits to fill in the gaps . However , the VA drug plan covers more than Medicare Part D covers .
I would advise enrolling in both Medicare Part A and B even though you get your medical care through the VA. . If you want to get care outside of the VA you will need to have Medicare A & B. Depending on what is going on with your health it may be important to get medical care from a doctor or hospital that is not part of the VA system . I have clients that have a Medicare Supplement with me so they can utilize doctors and hospitals outside of the VA but they still use VA doctors for some of their health care needs .
Treatment at VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- facilities can be a crapshoot . I hear good stories and bad so the answer is , it depends . If the VA facilities near you are well staffed and not overcrowded , you might `` get by '' with VA alone . Medicare Part A and B give you more options besides just VA facilities . Some VA pharmacies may not have the medications you need in stock and it may take weeks to receive your meds . Having Medicare Part D -LRB- drug plan -RRB- allows you to purchase your Rx via mail order or at a local pharmacy . Medicare Part A and B , along with a good Medicare supplement plan expands your options and may provide shorter wait times for care .
Yes , you can have both Medicare and VA Benefits . One plan will be a secondary payer . Since the Veterans Administration benefits must be used at VA facilities , usually Medicare is secondary to the VA insurance . However , sometimes VA drug benefits are a good supplemental plan to Medicare , and thus becomes the secondary payer .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
Variable annuities -LRB- VA -RRB- s are a security under FINRA and an insurance product under the department of insurance . VAs have two account types : the general interest rate account and the separate sub account that uses equity and bond investments . VAs have internal charges that are paid from the contributions of the policy owner and any crediting or debiting of the accounts are applied , i.e. you can lose make or lose money .
In order to get VA Life insurance , someone must meet one these conditions : 1 -RRB- Have converted their SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI -LRB- Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- within 120 days after separating from the Service . This can be extended one year with a statement of good health . 2 -RRB- Have been given a VA rating for a new service related disability incurred in the past two years . This qualifies them for S-DVI -LRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Qualified for VMLI -LRB- Veterans Mortgage Life Insurance -RRB- by virtue of being a disabled veteran who was able to get an SAH grant .
VA Life Insurance is not taxable , as long as the beneficiary of the policy is not the `` estate '' . When life insurance proceeds are left to the estate , they are taxable , whether issued by the Veterans Administration or from a private source . But life insurance proceeds left to a person or group do not generally incur income tax . VA Life Insurance is also subject to estate tax if the amount of the death benefit , added to the value of the estate , exceeds the exempted amount . Only the excess is taxed with estate taxes , and the federal exemption is 5.25 million this year . Some states have state estate -LRB- inheritance -RRB- taxes and some do n't .
To be fair to Suze , she has online piece called The Truth About Annuities , that outlines her position on annuities and which also addresses variable annuities -LRB- VA -RRB- . While she appears to question the VA expense loads a legitimate gripe as in all investment , she seems to down play the tax deferral feature . Read her piece online to determine her position .
A veteran needs Long Term Care Insurance if he/she does not want to utilize long term health care provided by the Veterans Administration . This may be due to location or some other bias the veteran has about receiving VA medical care . Or a veteran might want Long Term Care Insurance in case he/she can not qualify for full benefits or full compensation for care offered by the VA. .
You can opt out of Part B by sending a letter to Social security asking that your Part B coverage be cancelled . I hope you have carefully weighed that decision because in order for you to have DRUG coverage yuo have to have Part A AND Part B . If you do not have Part B you can not have any coverage for Outpatient Services - doctors , lab , xrays , etc - unless you have VA coverage and then what happens if you need treatment at a non-VA facility . You need to weigh this question very thoroughly because yuou could be cutting your own throat
You asked a very detailed and complicated question . Your first cost is , if you are a service connected veteran , was the days and months you spent in that `` foxhole '' or some distant country that separated you from your family and friends . However , you do not have to be `` service connected '' in order to obtain treatment by the VA. . You can go through a `` annual means '' testing at VA where you are required to provide `` financial details '' including if you do have health insurance . Then you can also be classified as a `` hardship case '' by disclosing financial information and the type of treatment you need . Generally your copays are $ 8 for medication ; outpatient copays are $ 15 for non = specialist and $ 50 for specialist . If you have to be admitted , your copay is the current year Medicare deductible which was $ 840 in 2003 and has been indexing each year and will be $ 2016 in 2014
Why would you want to `` pitch '' a Variable Annuity ? A VA is a useful product for those individuals who want to have upside performance , a basic death benefit , and other living benefits such as Guaranteed Minimum Income Benefits . But PRODUCT , and that includes any of the insurance based products , should be part of an overall consulting relationship where the client understand the risks and rewards of that product . The job of the financial advisor when selling a client a VA is to fact find , determine a client 's risk tolerance , and then provide choices commensurate with a client 's goals . If you do that , a Variable Annuity does n't get pitched , it becomes the product of choice by the client because of the features that it offers .
If plan to enlist in the Air Force , you will receive $ 400,000 of Term Life Insurance under SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers Group Life Insurance -RRB- provided by the VA. . There will be a small charge . If you do n't want to keep that much coverage , you can reduce it by increments of $ 50,000 or cancel it altogether .
Soldiers are automatically enrolled in the VA 's group life insurance plan -LRB- SGLI -RRB- at a face amount of $ 400,000 . There is a low cost charge to the individual being insured . If the soldier does not want that much , he/she can choose to reduce the face amount . There are also some options to insure his/her family .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How Can A Self Employed Person Save For Retirement ?
Start a percentage of profit in a savings account this might take sometime but will pay off later in being self employed means you like the freedom that comes with it . Do n't borrow money in most cases you are making enough money to run your business and live . So live below your means get help to evaluate where you are at you can get this help free most consultants or financial planners will get paid from the carrier not you . Dividend stocks and IUL life policies are good in this case and will help you earn tax free money later . I would invest in Land they are not making any more . Just say for example Hersey stock symbol -LRB- hsy -RRB- is a world dominator and has paid dividends as high as 7 dollars per share which a 10k dollar investment now could pay dividends of say 7-10k 15 years from now .
That is an excellent question , and one we could spend all day discussing . To make it really simple , let 's start with three things that you can do . First , decide what retirement looks like to you . What age would you like to retire , at what level of living , and where . Then , once you have that picture , look at where you are now in relation to being able to accomplish that retirement . Once you 've got that snapshot , then you find an advisor that can help you get to that goal . There are a great number of investment options out there to choose from , they can help you find the ones that are right for you , and your goals . I appreciate you for asking ! Thanks !
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
Most people who are self employed need to pick up an individual policy . This would be considered a self employed health insurance policy . There is no set difference or requirements between a person who is employed and has to pick up his own insurance or a self employed person . There could be a difference as far as tax being deductible since a self employed person will usually file a Schedule C . An HSA qualified plan is a great way to purchase health insurance if you are self employed due to the tax advantages . Ask your tax adviser .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
Technically you ca n't in all but a few states . To form a group under the regulations of virtually all states you have to have an employer-employee relationship which at a minimum requires two people , the employer and at least one common law employee -LRB- generally a W2 status employee -RRB- . Colorado and Delaware do appear to be states that make provisions for a self-employed person to purchase health insurance on agroup contract basis . This is one of the issues the Affordable Care Act essentially dealt with beginning on January 1 , 2014 when it 's provisions eliminated pre-existing condition exclusions and being declined for coverage in the individual and group marketplaces . So , other than the fact that the open enrollment season concluded on March 31st , 2014 there is now no legal prohibition preventing a self-employed person from getting individual health insurance . This does not mean , however , that states have changed their individual laws regarding eligibility for group contracts and to the best of my knowledge no states have changed their policies in this regard . There are still a few industry association group health plans in existence but they have become increasingly rare over the years . For most self-employed persons reading this answer your best option and generally your only option will be to purchase individual health insurance .
Yes , you can usually get Disability Insurance if you are self employed . It will depend on your health and occupation ; you will need to be approved , similar to applying for Life Insurance . Self employed people must rely on themselves if they are disabled , so it is very important to have Disability Insurance as a self employed person .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is employer sponsored . If you are not employed but have funds to save for retirement you should consider an individual retirement account -LRB- IRA . -RRB- The amount that you can save each year in an IRA is substantially less than in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- but it might be sufficient for you . If you are self-employed there are modified IRA plans that might suit your needs better .
No , not exempt as such . Whether you get your health insurance through an employer based plan or whether you are self-employed and purchase your own individual health insurance can have tax implications for you though . Generally , in today 's employer based insurance environment the employee is paying some portion of their individual and/or dependent health insurance premiums . And , in most such cases the employer is taking your share of the premium out of your paycheck on a pre-tax basis under a Section 125 Plan . The employee is receiving a tax advantage in this context as their share of their premium is taken out of paycheck on a pre-tax basis thus reducing their taxable net income and reducing the amount they pay in taxes . For the self-employed this issue gets more complex and you should seek the advice of a CPA or tax attorney . Health insurance premiums a self-employed person can be deducted or expensed depending upon how your business is structured and what your individual situation is . As is always the case when we 're talking about taxes it 's more complicated than the very simplistic answer that I have given and that is why you should seek professional advice on this matter .
Well , Yes and No . You can always deduct your individual health insurance premiums on your Schedule A , Itemized Deductions , on your income tax form along with other eligible medical expenses . The catch is -LRB- there always is one is n't there ? -RRB- that you have to itemize your deductions -LRB- which you are probably doing as a self-employed person -RRB- and that thanks to ObamaCare your total deductible medical expenses now have to exceed 10 % of your income before you receive any tax benefit . This is generally a pretty high bar to clear for most self-employed people and so the net effect for most self-employed persons is that they receive little or no tax benefit . But as some politicians seem to like to point out , you did n't really build your business . So , why should you get a tax break ? And someone has to pay the taxes to provide for the subsidies for other people 's health insurance or Medicaid coverage . We all know that everyone who owns a business is rich so why not you ?
Assuming that you are asking if you can be self-employed and be on Medicare , the answer is yes ! In fact , there are many seniors that are self-employed , and the number seems to be increasing . There is also a separate tax deduction for health insurance if you are self-employed . This includes health , dental and long-term-care coverage for you and other family members . And there 's some good news . Last May , the IRS announced that Medicare premiums were also tax-deductible -LRB- subject to specific limitations and restrictions -RRB- . And you do not have to itemize on your tax return to get the deduction . Reputable websites that are operated by experienced brokers can offer additional specific information that may be helpful . You can also view quotes from top carriers and easily apply for coverage .
Self employed individuals have many options when it comes to retirement planning . You may consider a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . HR 10 or Keogh plans are also an option for self employed individuals if your business structure allows it . There are also simplified plans , including simplified 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans for small business owners .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
Yes , Long Term Care Insurance qualifies for self employed health insurance , as a tax deduction . The deduction is taken on form 1040 , line 29 , and is for the self employed person , their spouse and their dependents . The maximum long term care insurance annual premiums that are allowed to be deducted per person are based on age and are as follows : Under age 40 - $ 350 Age 41-50 - $ 660 Age 51 - 60 - $ 1,310 Age 61 - 70 - $ 3,600 Age 71 + - $ 4,370
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement.The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back.If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you.With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay.The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA.Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap .
Planning for retirement is planning for your lifestyle in your golden years ; you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your effective tax bracket and a life expectancy report so you can create a reasonable timeline . If youre younger than age 45 , you should consider retirement at age 70 because your life expectancy may be 20 to 25 years more if youre a nonsmoker and in good health . You need to determine if your employer sponsors a defined contribution plan like a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , especially if the employer offers a contribution match . If your employer doesnt offer such a plan , you may want to consider a Roth IRA or Traditional IRA . If youre self-employed and you make six figure income , you may want to investigate SEPs . Some retirement plans are non-qualified using annuities and/or life insurance to fund their retirement . Once you perform your personal financial profile , you can begin the review process to determine how youll fund your retirement .
Health insurance for the self employed is no different from any other health insurance plan . There are no `` special plans '' or discounts applied to premiums if you are self employed . You can buy an individual major medical plan or in some states you may qualify for a group health insurance plan .
If you are self employed and you contribute to your own health insurance plan then the tax code allows deductions for `` contribution to a self employed health insurance plan . If you work a corporation and you are a W-2 employee your employer can sponsor a Health Insurance Plan , like a `` cafeteria plan '' and your contributions are paid with `` pretax dollars '' . The complication arises when you have incurred expenses and you want to deduct those expenses to reduce your tax then the expenses can not be deducted because your contributions to the plan are paid with `` pretax dollars ''
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can You Drive A Car Without Insurance On It ?
You can drive a car without insurance on it . A big car . A small car . A vehicle that is red , blue or green . But do you want to ? Unless your policy `` follows '' the vehicle and places insurance on it , you may not be covered . Make sure you 're covered by working with an experienced broker that can save you money .
That is an excellent question ! How lucky are you ? If you think that you can drive without being pulled over , or without getting into any kind of accident , then maybe you can . If you do n't think you are the lucky type , then you are smart . Getting caught uninsured behind the wheel is one of the worst things that you can do to yourself . The fines are stiff , and there is often jail time , and it is extremely difficult if not impossible to get affordable insurance for a long time afterwards . In short ? No , you can not . Thanks for asking !
You can drive a car without insurance on it . It should run just fine . However if you are pulled over by a police officer , or become involved in a car accident you could get into plenty of legal and financial trouble . Driving an uninsured car is against the law . Any vehicle damage , or medical bills caused by the accident may become your sole responsibility . Buy insurance before driving the car .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
Driving without car insurance can have both legal and financial impacts upon your life . Caveat , this is geared towards Michigan drivers . Financially : if you get into a collision and are negligent , you could be sued for physical damages to the other driver/passengers . Without insurance you will be on the hook for the entire judgment against you . Furthermore , if you are driving a new car you will either be out the money you spent on the car , or you will owe the leasing company or lender the value of the car . Legal : in Michigan driving without proof of no-fault insurance can result in a $ 500 ticket and three points on your license . So you will be out $ 500 immediately , and a huge increase in your insurance upon renewal . This is assuming you will still have the same insurance and not get a non-renewal notice . I hope this helps .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
The first penalty is that you more than likely would not be able to register your car for use on public roads . Most States require car insurance in order to do that . If you had car insurance but let it lapse , or cancel it , the Insurance Company in many states like Connecticut , will notify the Department of Motor Vechicles -LRB- DMV -RRB- . They will contact you and require you to show proof of coverage . If you can not , they will suspend your registration andit will be illigal to drive your car -LRB- s -RRB- . If you do drive and are stopped by a police officer , along with the charge for which you have been stopped , you will also be found to be driving an unregistered and uninsured car which will add to the size of your fine . In many cases the car will be towed and impounded and you will have to find another means of transportation back home , for which you may have to pay . You may also be required to appear in court . Once that is behind you , in order to get your car back , you will have to show proof that you have bought insurance again . It will be more expensive now because of the violations and the fact that you have not had continuous coverage . You will also have to pay to have the car releassed from the impound facility . You will have lost considerable time from work for all of this meaning that on top of having to shell out more money , you will have lost pay . Bottom line ... do n't drive without insurance .
DO N'T drive a new car home without insurance ! Always make sure you have active insurance before driving your car , especially a new car . If you lease or get a loan on a car the finance department usually will not let your drive off of the lot without proof of insurance . It depends on the state , but to my knowledge most states allow at least two weeks from the purchase of a new car for you to call your agent or carrier and update your vehicle information . During those two weeks the new vehicle -LRB- or newly purchased used vehicle -RRB- is typically considered covered . However , always update your vehicles with your agent or carrier asap !
If you purchased another car just call your agent and have the insurance transferred to the new car . Otherwise if you sold your car and are not planning on driving , then cancel the insurance . The insurance company will return any unused premium . Obviously you can not insure a car that you no longer have . If you are planning on driving you need to talk to your agent about getting liability coverage or in many states you will lose your license for driving without insurance , even though you do not own a car . Liability protects you from law suit in the event of an accident and has very little to do with vehicle ownership .
You most certainly can get auto insurance without a car . If you needed toborrow , test drive , rent , or lease a vehicle for whatever reason you would purchase what is called a drive other car policy . It covers you for driving the car that you dont own . This coverage would pay claims first in the event of a claim . The insurance that the owner of the car carries on the car would pay secondary .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
Every state is different , but if you are caught driving your car without insurance in Connecticut , there could be consequences for sure . Presumably you would have been pulled over for something else . So you would be issued a ticket for that AND for driving without insurance . If you are not able to prove coverage to the court or DMV , you would face a serious fine , your registration would be suspended and perhaps your license as well . If you are found to be driving without insurance and have just caused an accident , please keep in mind the following : `` Insurance only provides coverage , it does not limit liability '' .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
Driving without car insurance in not a smart idea . Colorado requires drivers to carry insurance limits of $ 25,000 per per person , $ 50,000 per accident for bodily injury , and $ 15,000 per occurrence of property damage liability . If you get caught driving without insurance , the police can arrest you and impound your car . The court can impose additional fines and requirements , or restrict your ability to drive . Contact a local agent to discuss your auto insurance needs . If you can not afford full coverage , let them know that . It is better to have the state minimum requirements and be able to pay for the coverage , then no coverage at all . Let us know if their is anything we can assist you with !
In Montana you get what is called a Non - Owned policy this is for liability only and will not repair the car that you are driving so if you are driving a friends car and wrecking it cover damage done to others but nothing for your friends car . Now in Montana also the insurance follows the car 1st so if you borrowed your friends car and got into an accident then their insurance covers it first then you insurance 2nd in many cases their insurance will collect what they paid from your insurance carrier . I have many clients that have this coverage because they ca n't afford a car . As stated by the last person that usually it is because the courts require it if you have had problems with your driving record . This is not always the case many of my clients have great driving records but own no car .
You can drive a car without insurance on it . It should run just fine . However if you are pulled over by a police officer , or become involved in a car accident you could get into plenty of legal and financial trouble . Driving an uninsured car is against the law . Any vehicle damage , or medical bills caused by the accident may become your sole responsibility . Buy insurance before driving the car .
Most auto dealers will not let you drive the car off of the lot unless you have proof of insurance if there is a loan on the car . It is never a good idea to drive a car without insurance . If you traded a car in , then the coverage on the older car may extend to the new car temporarily , but you need to call your agent as soon as possible and get it changed . Most dealerships have an insurance agent they work with who can get you coverage as well .
No , you do not need to have your own insurance on the car you are driving . However , you DO need to be at least listed as a driver . Just like it 's illegal to drive without a license or permit - it is also illegal to drive a vehicle without insurance ! If you own your vehicle I can provide some free quotes at : www.PaInsuranceMadeEasy.com
There are two issues here . First , you state that you do not have car insurance yet were driving . I can only assume that the car you were driving is your own , registered to you . In a state like Connecticut , where it is required by law to carry car insurance in order to register and drive a car on public roads and highways , if a police officer was on the scene , you would have been issued a ticket . and possibly would have had your car towed . The second issue is that you wer hit by another car . That person , in the absense of any other details , would probably be held at fault for the accident and therefore their insurance company would pay for the damage repair to your car .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
end question
start question
life-insurance
When Is Life Insurance Necessary ?
Anytime that someone wants to help ensure that their family is able to better survive financially after their passing . If you were to pass away suddenly , where would your family get the money to replace your income , pay the debts you left behind , or pay for college educations for your children just name a few examples of how the payout from a life insurance can help . Contact a local agent to discuss product availability , pricing , and product details .
Why is health insurance necessary ? Actually it 's not necessary , at least for another year . In 2014 changes will be coming . But as of today , health insurance is not necessary to have . You can self insure . The thing is if you self insure and have claims , you 're expected to pay them . So you would have to surrender assests to pay that bill . Insurance of ANY KIND is simply a form of liquid money to pay for things so that your other invested wealth can `` stay '' invested . So no insurance is never necessary , it just is a smart solution for some issues .
Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met ; days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 152 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Qualifications to receive the Medicare SNF benefit : 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Although a Medicare plan may cover SNF copayments , given the qualification restrictions for the Medicare SNF benefit , Medicare beneficiaries should consider separate Short Term Care nursing facility coverage to manage the financial risk of an uncovered SNF stay .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
To be specific about what health insurance does not cover , you would have to check your plan 's policy 's exclusions & limitations . However , if you 're asking a general question , I think the key term here is `` medically necessary '' . If your provider bills a service as medically necessary , then it would generally be covered . From a common sense standpoint , why would an insurance company cover something that 's not medically necessary . A good example of something that 's not medically necessary is cosmetic surgery .
Life insurance is only necessary if you have a set outcome that you want to achieve , and you can not reach that goal without it . E.g. Maybe your goal is that your children can go to college , even if you are not around to finance their education . Do you have enough invested or saved up now to attain that goal ? If not , life insurance would be necessary if you died in a short time , because no other vehicle could provide a large infusion of cash into your assets shortly after you took it out . No one can look into the heart of someone else to determine that something is necessary for them . But you can tell that by looking at your own goals , determining if you have the funds to meet those , and then judging whether life insurance is something that could help you attain those outcomes , either in life or in death .
If you can afford a financial loss of your personal items and can easily repurchase what may have been lost due to a potential event such as fire , water , wind , theft and so on as there are many perils that are covered then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can absorb the costs of a potential law suit for bodily injury and/or property damage that can run well into the thousands or hundreds of thousands even if the suit is only alleged then renters insurance is not necessary . If you can pay your loss of use -LRB- substitute housing -RRB- if you are potentially displaced from your home for a loss as mentioned above then renters insurance is not necessary . If you said no to any of these you may wish to consider renters insurance . Renters insurance has to be the most affordable insurance on the market that covers so much for so little .
Breast augmentation is generally considered a cosmetic procdure and not a medically necessary procedure , therefore , it is usually not covered . Breast reduction can be considered medically necessary and covered by health insurance if the breasts are causing back and neck issues . If it is considered medically necessary the surgery is covered once a woman is 18 years old and an adult .
Most health insurance will only pay for breast reductions if it is medically necessary . Medically necessary is a subjective term . For example if you want breast reduction surgery for cosmetic reasons it would not be covered . If on the other hand if you were 5 ' 2 '' and needed reduction surgery to ease back issues posture and pain it may be medically necessary . You should check with you doctor , read your Evidence of Coverage and check with the insurance company .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
Medicare pays for a hospital bed when a doctor prescribes use of the bed as being medically necessary and when the person needing the bed is covered by Medicare Part B. To qualify for the care as medically necessary , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You can not change positions in a normal bed 2 -RRB- You need that type of bed to change positions for pain relief 3 -RRB- You need to sleep with the head of the bed elevated at least 30 degrees for medical reasons 4 -RRB- You need traction equipment that must be attached to a hospital bed
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Life insurance is not essential in terms of being mandated . E.g. Auto insurance is legally required in order to drive a car . Life insurance is not legally required in order to live . Life insurance is essential to most people , however , in terms of being necessary . The people who it is necessary to are not the person being insured . They are those who are left behind .
Medicare does not pay for private duty nurses , or a private room when not medically necessary . You are really describing Long Term Care which is also not included in Medicare . There is a difference in skilled care , respite care and personal care . If you qualify for medically necessary skilled care , Medicare will cover that , but as you asked the question , my response would be no it does not .
The amount of coverage on a homeowners policy is prescribed by the lender in the majority of cases . As long as the market conditions are lower than the cost of rebuilding that works well . However , when housing prices rise , lenders often want more coverage than necessary to replace the house . In California the lenders are not allowed to demand more than the amount necessary to reconstruct the home . Your agent can provide all the information that you require .
Insurance is what many would call a `` necessary evil '' . We pay for it to ensure that there will be some help in the event we face a loss . The absence of insurance can wipe out a family or business financially . When in place Insurance can cover medical expenses , automobile accidents , dental services , real estate , valuables and a persons life . It is definitely necessary to help cover potential losses that could happen to any of us . I know sometimes it hurts but we really need to look into having it .
Medicare Supplemental Plan F covers 100 % of what Medicare does n't cover . Keep in mind , when you have Supplemental -LRB- AKA Medigap -RRB- Plans , Medicare is your primary insurance provider . For medically necessary procedures , Medicare Parts A -LRB- Hospital -RRB- and B -LRB- Doctors -RRB- provides good coverage , but still leaves folks on Medicare with a lot of out of pocket exposure . The Plan F pays for everything that Medicare does n't pay . However , if Medicare determines that the medical procedure you received was n't medically necessary , they wo n't pay anything nor will the Supplement Plan -LRB- regardless of who you get your supplemental plan with -RRB- .
Whole life insurance is financial protection for your life and your income . The purpose of life insurance is to replace income lost when you pass away . Your beneficiary -- the person you chose to receive the replacement money -- will receive a check or a series of checks when you pass . In most cases , a beneficiary is a spouse or a child . A beneficiary should always be someone who depends on your income to survive . Whole life insurance covers you for your entire life . A major difference between whole life and term life is that whole life grows cash value . Cash value is somewhat of a savings account within your insurance policy . In the first few years that you pay into the policy , the insurance company charges higher rates than is necessary to insure your life . The extra amount that you pay goes into the cash value account . Cash value grows over time and can be borrowed against if you need cash .
Typically , air purifiers and related items such as humidifiers and electric air cleaners are not covered by Medicare . However , Medicare may be able to cover a humidifier , when medically necessary , if used with some forms of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- . Under that scenario , I would suggest confirming with Medicare directly to see what would be necessary to meet those requirements . I do n't know how much they cost brand new , but if expense tolerance is a large concern and one is desired , there may be discount ones or pre-owned ones that may be available for a low price that is tolerable on websites such as amazon , ebay , etc. . I would suggest taking a look in those areas for an alternative way to save money on the purchase of an air purifier . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Can You Rollover A Non Qualified Retirement Plan ?
Generally non-qualified retirement plans are funded by life insurance and/or annuities . Transfers or 1035 exchanges can sometimes be construed as rollovers , but there are rules that govern those exchanges : Life insurance to life insurance , Life insurance to Annuitybut not Annuity to Life . Any other funding product may have other rollover rules .
On if the Annuity is already in a Qualified Retirement Account . An IRA is a type of Qualified Retirement Account . That basically means the money in the account was contributed on a pre-taax basis . Qualified Retirement Accounts usually can be transferred from one account to another as a general rule . -LRB- there are a few exceptions to this -RRB- But if the Annuity is a non-qualified Annuity then you are not able to transfer it -LRB- it is technically a transfer not a rollover -RRB- to an IRA . And there is no need to do so . An IRA has a less favorable tax status than a non-qualified annuity . It would not be a benefit to transfer it to an IRA .
An annuity rollover from one annuity to another is generally a tax free 1035 exchange . The rollover needs to be in the same non-qualified or qualified category . This permits the transfer one annuity to another annuity without incurring a taxable event on the gain in the policy . A 1035 exchange also includes the notification of the policy surrender from the replacing company to the existing company .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
Per IRS rules , you CAN NOT rollover a Variable Annuity to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . You can move a Variable Annuity into an Individual Retirement Account -LRB- IRA -RRB- however , turning non-qualified monies into qualified , meaning you have to follow the rules for IRA 's . I recommend that you reach out to your Representative who helped you set up your Annuity to talk about options you have available . Annuities have surrender charges which need to be taken into consideration . If you need a Representative , let me know .
Is a rollover IRA a Roth IRA ? Well , no . Really two different things going on here . You ca n't rollover an IRA into a Roth plan without paying taxes on the transaction . In other words you have to cash your IRA out , pay taxes and then you could possibly put them in a Roth . A rollover IRA usually means moving funds from one to another similar plans . Usually , there are no tax consequences for a rollover .
A rollover IRA is an IRA that is funded from the proceeds of another qualified plan , most likely another IRA or a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The proceeds of these plans all have the same tax consequence so a rollover is simple . A Roth IRA has different tax rules . In order to roll an IRA or 401 -LRB- k -RRB- into a Roth IRA , the proceeds must be subject to income tax as ordinary income . This may be a very wise thing to do but should not be done without some competent counsel .
Generally non-qualified retirement plans are funded by life insurance and/or annuities . Transfers or 1035 exchanges can sometimes be construed as rollovers , but there are rules that govern those exchanges : Life insurance to life insurance , Life insurance to Annuitybut not Annuity to Life . Any other funding product may have other rollover rules .
This is a tough question . How old are you ? What is your health ? And why are you taking the money out ? If you are older than 591/2 , you can request a distribution form from your plan sponsor or employer . The form will ask whether you want to take a single distribution or a series of systematic payments . If it is not going into a Rollover IRA , the sponsor usually withholds the taxes on your behalf and you would get the net amount paid to you either in a check or an EFT . If you are YOUNGER than 591/2 , there is a 10 % excise tax that is charged -LRB- premature withdrawal -RRB- by the IRS . So if you can , try and avoid withdrawing funds prior to your retirement and do a LOAN instead . That way you are paying yourself the interest on the loaned portion of the 401K funds , and not a bank . Depending on your plan , you may also be able to take out what they call `` in service '' distributions . These allow you to transfer your funds into IRA accounts and diversify your investments for retirement . And thanks to a recent IRS change , you can even move funds from your Retirement and create a guaranteed income stream -LRB- provided by the carrier that you purchase the product from -RRB- through a Deferred Income Annuity . Think of this like buying a defined benefit with your retirement assets that you can never outlive . I hope that this answers your question .
As long as your company allows roll overs into their retirement plan , you can roll your 403b money into that 401k plan . One exception may be if you have previously comingled your 403b funds with another IRA . Your company 401k plan administrator should be able to answer your specific questions . You can also roll your 403b into a traditional IRA or Roth IRA . Here is a link to an IRS rollover chart which shows all the directions retirement money can move . WEBSITELINK
There are three basic crediting methods used by non-qualified tax deferred annuities . The first is fixed interest rate crediting methods of 5 , 7 and 10 year guaranteed rates . Sentinel has a leading 5 year fixed interest rate . The second is the use of indice crediting methods , both domestic and foreign . Genworth has an innovative earnings rollover product . The third is separate sub accounts which use equity and bond instruments in variable annuities . Because these accounts are market driven you can lose money . Currently the variable annuity feature of the income rider is attractive for investors with an established risk tolerance . There are many competitive variable annuity contracts available . Prudential is one of the leading manufacturers of variable annuities .
No . Unfortunately , conversion is a one-way street . You can convert term insurance to permanent insurance but can not convert permanent insurance to term insurance . If you 're looking to get out of a whole life policy but still secure coverage at a lower price , you can look at completing a 1035 rollover into a Guaranteed Universal Life policy . It 's another permanent insurance program that minimizes the buildup of cash value to keep the premium at the lowest possible level with premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life . The 1035 rollover portion takes the cash value inside the whole life policy and applies it to the first year premium for the Guaranteed Universal Life policy to lower the premium even further . This can be a very valuable alternative course of action that is definitely worth considering . If you have a participating whole life policy , then the dividends paid by the program can be used to purchase paid-up additions to the policy -LRB- little amounts of paid-up coverage that accumulate over time that do not require additional premiums for the policy -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful . Please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions -LRB- you can reach me via the `` contact me '' button next to my name -RRB- . There are no fees for my services - all quotes are provided at no cost to you . Thanks very much .
There is one circumstance that I am aware of that will allow you to roll a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- balance to a Roth IRA without the associated taxes and penalties . If your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan has a Roth option , which is becoming more common , then you can roll the Roth portion of the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to a Roth IRA . I actually just did this for a client who had a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- balance that had two balances , one Roth and one traditional . We created two Rollover IRA accounts , one Roth and one traditional and completed the rollover .
Non-qualified retirement plans are not sanctioned for the tax deduction like qualified plans are under ERISA . Non-qualified retirement plans generally use annuities and life insurance . Annuities can be used in qualified plans , but life insurance can not . Non-qualified and qualified retirement plans using annuities , for an example , accumulate tax deferred , but the basis of a non-qualified annuity is distributed free of taxation , whereas qualified annuities are fully taxable including basis .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- rollover simply means that you are taking your funds in your current 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and moving them , rolling over , into an IRA , Individual Retirement Account . You can also transfer the your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to another 401 -LRB- k -RRB- as well if you are working for a new employer and they have a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- option . By rolling over your monies , you avoid any tax consequences as the money remains tax-deferred . There are several options for rolling these monies to an IRA . I usually recommend rolling them into an Annuity , a Fixed Indexed Annuity . The reason is to preserve the moneys you have worked so hard to get . You are guaranteed to never lose your initial balance and usually get market like gains . When you retire , if the account was set up correctly , you can get a lifetime income as well . If you are looking at options and would like more information , do not hesitate to contact your broker adviser . If you do not have one or would like a new perspective , contact me .
How to rollover a retirement plan ? Probably the best way to accomplish this is via a `` trustee to trustee '' transfer . A trustee in this case would be a financial institution like a bank , insurance company or mutual fund company and others . The advantage to this type of transfer is it creates no potential taxable event as the account holder never touches the funds .
That is a great question ! Simply put , a 401k rollover is what you call the action of taking the funds from one 401k and moving them -LRB- or `` rolling them over '' -RRB- into another 401k fund , or similar retirement vehicle . This has to be done in a very timely fashion , or there are tax consequences , and is most commonly done when you switch employers , and want to keep funding the 401k . Thanks for asking !
We insurance people like to use all sorts of acronyms , it keeps us mysterious and sexy . CDHP is the abbreviation for Consumer Directed Health Plan . This is a bit of a fuzzy designation but it is generally used in reference to a high deductible health insurance policy meant to be tied to a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA - see more mysterious letters -RRB- . An example would be a health insurance policy with a deductible of $ 6350 for an individual followed by 100 % co-insurance coverage after that -LRB- this is the maximum allowable in 2014 -RRB- . This plan would have no office visit , emergency room or prescription copayments with all covered services subject to the $ 6350 deductible . The premium for such a plan design should be meaningfully less than that of a lower deductible plan with copayments . The high deductible health plan policyholder is supposed to take their premium savings and set them aside in a Health Savings Account from which they pay for their routine expenses such as office visits and prescriptions . The amounts a person sets aside in an HSA reduce their net taxable income which reduces their taxes thus saving them not only premium dollars but tax dollars . Unused funds in the HSA can rollover from year-to-year and accumulate on a tax deferred basis over time to build up a financial nest egg that can be tapped into in a person 's Medicare eligibility years to pay for future medical expenses .
The reason many people rollover their 401 k plans is generally to have better control over the account if you are leaving that company . Also you have better control rather than having to contact the old imployer . You may get a getter return on your 40l k with a different investment firm ,
Can you rollover your 401k to a roth ira ? Not really no , there is no provision that allows you to roll the values in your 401k into a Roth without tax penalties . If you did something like this you would need to cash out your 401k which would be taxed at an income tax level combined with your current income , along with a 10 % penalty . So you would be losing roughly 40 % or more of you 401k values . Not something easily made up no matter how good an investment picker you might be .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is A Short Term Health Insurance Policy ?
Short Term Health Insurance is designed to cover individuals who are between jobs . Generally they can be purchased in increments of six months . Preexisting conditions are not covered . They are non-renewable , meaning if you have a six month policy for example , and the six month period expires , you need to enroll in a completely new plan .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
First , check with your college 's office of student affairs or administration and see if they have a student health insurance plan . Due to the requirements of ObamaCare many of these plans have been cancelled or are being phased out but some do still exist . Next , you can be covered as a dependent on your parent 's health insurance policy until age 26 so if you have recently lost or will be losing coverage when you start school you could possibly be added onto their plan . Regarding true major medical individual health insurance you are pretty well locked out until the next open enrollment period starting on November 15th and the earliest you could be covered would be January 1 , 2015 . This is unless you have what is called a change of life status event -LRB- marriage , divorce , child birth or adoption , losing other coverage -RRB- in which case you have a 60-day time frame to apply for individual health insurance coverage . If you are in good health and coverage for any pre-existing health conditions is not a major concern for you then the best solution for immediate coverage would be to apply for a short term medical insurance policy . These policies are pretty affordable and depending upon the insurance carrier they may issue a policy that runs for a period just short of one year and you can often reapply for coverage . If you reside in Tennessee , Arkansas or Mississippi contact me and I 'll be happy to help you out with this . If you reside in another state seek out a health insurance broker or go online and do a search for Short Term Medical . Assurant Health and United Healthcare/Golden Rule have pretty good short term policies and , of course , you would want to check with the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan in your state . Other than Medicaid that pretty well sums up your options as a student .
The general answer to your question is `` Yes . '' Though the renewal policy varies from insurance carrier to insurance carrier and may also be impacted by insurance department requirements in your state . Most short term medical policies can be renewed at least once and with some carriers and in some states perhaps up to three times . As a consequence of rising health insurance rates for ObamaCare compliant individual major medical policies for persons who qualify for little or no premium subsidies in the government health insurance marketplaces the interest in Short Term Major Medical plans has increased significantly . Insurance carriers have been modifying their Short Term Medical policies to take advantage of this opportunity and so there are many more options being made available and being offered for longer terms -LRB- some up to 11 months -RRB- than has historically been the case in this product segment . Short Term Major Medical insurance can be an affordable option for individuals who can pass relatively simple underwriting screening and who have no pre-existing condition concerns . A person considering this option should seek the services of an insurance broker who represents multiple carriers and who can help you find the policy best suited to your needs . You should also be aware that a Short Term Major Medical Plan does not qualify as minimum essential coverage under the terms of the Affordable Care Act and that you will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 95 or 1 % of your Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- on your 2014 taxes . However , this penalty can only be recovered from a tax refund and the premium savings may far outweigh any potential tax penalty some individuals might be faced with .
Job loss is always a unsettling period in our lives and having to address your health insurance concerns only compounds things . The first thing you should look into is the feasibility of continuing your coverage through your former employer 's health plan under either your state 's continuation of coverage provisions or , if your employer has 20 + employees , under the Federal COBRA continuation guidelines . Unless you were terminated with cause your former employer should have provided you with information regarding your rights in this area . If you have a spouse who is employed and has health insurance coverage available through their employer this is a qualifying event for you to be added as a dependent on your spouse 's plan or for you and your spouse to both enroll in the spouse 's employer 's health plan if you had both been enrolled under your former employer 's health plan . If your spouse has access to coverage through their employer this will almost certainly make you ineligible for subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Some people , especially those with family coverage , may find paying the entire premium for the former employer 's health plan to be cost prohibitive or may not want to continue be covered under it for other reasons . Losing coverage from an employer 's group health plan is a `` Qualifying Event '' that grants you a `` Special Election Period '' under the Affordable Care Act . You have a 60-day window after losing coverage to purchase individual health insurance either directly from an insurance carrier or through the state or Federal Health Insurance Marketplace in your state . The only good reason to purchase your coverage through a government health insurance marketplace is if your income level for 2015 would qualify you for a premium subsidy and possibly for cost sharing reductions . Currently a person 's qualification for these subsidies is based upon the applicant 's projected FAMILY income for all of 2015 . So , your situation is not an uncomplicated one . SEEK OUT AN EXPERIENCED HEALTH INSURANCE BROKER WHO REPRESENTS MULTIPLE INSURANCE CARRIERS AND WHO IS LICENSED TO SELL COVERAGE IN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE FOR GUIDANCE ON THESE MATTERS . If you are in good health and pre-existing condition coverage is not a concern for you , then in the event that the options I 've listed above do n't fit your financial needs , you can consider Short Term Major Medical insurance coverage as bridge coverage if you anticipate getting another job in the weeks or months ahead . These policies are usually less expensive -LRB- sometimes significantly so -RRB- than the options discussed above and can provide protection from financial ruin in the event an illness or injury occurs while the Short Term Medical policy is in effect . PLEASE NOTE : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty so there could be tax ramifications if you are covered under such a policy for more than 90-days . This does not mean that a Short Term Medical policy is an option you should not consider but it is an option that you should choose only with a full understanding of the positives and negatives associated with this choice . Which is another reason you should seek the guidance of an experienced Health Insurance Broker .
Short term life insurance is generally thought of as term life insurance that comes in terms of 1 , 5 or 10 years . One year Term , or Annually Renewable Term , can be helpful for someone in between jobs or some other need for very short term coverage . However , one year Term will go up in price each year , and sometimes you need to re-qualify every year . So locking in a longer term is much easier and more cost effective if you need more than a couple years of coverage . Five year Term is hard to find , and thus the prices are not as competitive as one would think . I have found that ten year Term rates often run as low or lower than five year Term . Since there is no penalty to drop Term life insurance , you may as well take the longer term and then just drop it if you do n't need it the whole ten years . Ten year Term policies are common and competitively priced . Again , if you need longer coverage , it can cost less to lock the rate in longer while you are younger and your health is good . But if you are going for short term coverage , 10 or 15 year Term can be a good way to go .
Short Term disability Insurance pays a percentage of your salary if you become temporarily disabled , meaning that you are not able to work for a short period of time due to a sickness or injury -LRB- excluding on-the-job-injuries , which are covered by workers compensation insurance -RRB- . A typical short-term disability insurance policy provides you with 40 to 65 percent of your pre-disability base salary , according to the Life and Health Insurance Foundation for Education . The National Association of Insurance Commissioners estimates that these benefits generally last between three to six months . Most short-term disability insurance policies have a `` cap '' , meaning you receive a maximum benefit amount per month . Short-term disability insurance policies also have a limit on the amount of times that you can receive benefits-up to two years , according to the Insurance Information Institute . .
My sick sense of humor almost tempts me to say `` No , real estate agents are specifically excluded from getting health insurance by law '' but I wo n't do that . Yes , you can get health insurance . What you do for a living has no bearing on your eligibility for health insurance , especially now that ObamaCare is in full effect regarding guaranteed issuance of policies . In my experience , most real estate agents are self-employed/1099 contractor status people and not W2 employees of an agency . So , this probably means that you will need to get individual health insurance either through your state 's government health insurance marketplace or outside of it . So , just like you would tell those `` For Sale By Owner '' folks , you need to seek out an experienced health insurance agent who can assist you in obtaining coverage . If you have been without health insurance for more than 60-days and have n't had what is called a `` change of life status event '' -LRB- marriage , divorce , childbirth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- then you are in a time frame where you would be ineligible for enrollment in true major medical insurance until the next annual open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 and the earliest your coverage could go into effect would be for January 1st , 2015 . I hate to be the one to deliver this news but that is how ObamaCare works . Your only coverage option to carry you through until then would be to take out a Short Term Medical insurance plan . There are a variety of short term medical plan options available . However , you need to be aware that short term medical plans do still use limited underwriting questions , can decline a person for coverage and they do not cover pre-existing conditions . Please feel free to contact me if you need advice or assistance in this matter .
Short term disability insurance pays a percentage of your salary for a specified amount of time if you are ill or injured and can not perform the duties of your occupation . Please note , you may be required to use up your sick days -LRB- if applicable -RRB- before your short term disability coverage will start making payments . If you have short term coverage , you may want to consider supplementing it with long termdisabilityinsurance as many people who need to use their short term disability coverage will often be unable to work for longer than the short term plan allows . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your disability insurance program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Aflac offers short term disability insurance through employer sponsored plans , only . Aflac does not sell individual short term disability plans to individuals . Their short term disability plans must be paid for by worksite premium payroll deduction . There are only a couple of companies that offer individual short term disability insurance . Many more offer individual long term care disability insurance .
Short term disability insurance is paycheck protection in case of a disability event . And many consumers can only afford short term disability versus long term disability coverage . Mutual of Omaha is a major carrier in short term disability insurance . Keep in mind that you may have short term disability insurance through your employers group benefit plan . You also have Social Security disability insurance , although benefits may be limited .
Short term life insurance , such as 5 year Term or 10 year Term , can cost much less than life insurance locked in for longer periods of time , such as 30 year Term Life insurance or Universal Life . However , when that short term is complete , the price for that policy will jump extremely high . If the insured person 's health has gotten worse during that time , he/she may need to pay much higher premiums or possibly may not even qualify for a new life insurance policy . Therefore , it is important to look at the need involved , when purchasing a life insurance policy . If you are 40 years old and want it to cover your children going to college , getting a short term policy may suffice . If you want it to pay for your funeral , then it is better go with some type permanent plan .
Yes , you can . There is some chance the college/university you are attending offers a student health insurance plan though these are becoming increasingly rare because of their general inability to meet the requirements of ObamaCare . If you are under age 26 you can still be covered as a dependent on your parent 's group or individual health insurance policy . You can apply for individual health insurance coverage either through a government health insurance marketplace or from an insurance broker and/or insurance carrier outside of the government marketplace -LRB- please note that depending upon your circumstances you may not be eligible to enroll for individual coverage until the next open enrollment period beginning November 15th for coverage effective January 1 , 2015 at the earliest -RRB- . And finally , you may want to consider applying for a short term major medical insurance policy . Short term medical policies do have a few underwriting questions , you can be declined for coverage and they do not cover pre-existing conditions . These limitations aside , for a healthy young person a short term medical policy may be the most cost effective solution to protecting yourself against future accidents or illnesses . You would be well served to seek out an experienced health insurance broker to assist you in finding the best solution for your needs and budget .
Short term medical insurance provides benefits to the insured for specified period of time . Here are a few things to note about Short Term medical coverage : Term is 1-12 months Pre exisitng conditions are not covered . Typically catastrophic coverage in nature . Must be in the US . Can not be currently pregnant . Short term in an excellent solution for people inbetween jobs , recent graduates , an alternative to COBRA or for those that can not afford 2014 reform rates . Please click the `` Contact Me '' button on the left or run a personalized short term medical quote at : WEBSITELINK Also , you can call me anytime at : 561-320-2978
How do you define cheap ? In 2014 the average monthly cost for a Silver level ObamaCare compliant major medical plan was $ 328 . By that standard any coverage costing less than that would be `` cheap '' . People who qualify for little or no subsidy of their individual health insurance -LRB- shame on you for making more than $ 42,000 annually -RRB- may argue that $ 328 or more per month for health insurance is n't affordable much less cheap . But the folks in Washington , D.C. know better about these things than you do . Some people who are healthy and are low consumers of health care services have turned to Short Term Medical plans as a more affordable option for health insurance coverage . And , indeed this may work out well for some people as Short Term Medical policies are generally cheaper than individual major medical policies . However , before pursuing this strategy you do need to be aware that Short Term Medical plans do n't cover pre-existing conditions , usually do n't cover preventive care , may not cover prescription drugs and may have other limitations . Also , they do not meet the criteria under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual coverage mandate and therefore can leave you vulnerable to a tax penalty for noncompliance . You should seek out an experienced health insurance agent to discuss your needs and options and to fully understand whatever health insurance product it is that you purchase .
Before shopping for short term disability insurance , first determine if your employer 's group benefit plan offers it . If your an executive or key person in the company , you may ask for short term disability insurance to be added to your compensation package . Short term disability benefits usually is designed for two years . Short term disability is paycheck protection against illness or injury recovery .
There is a huge inventory of disability insurance companies that carry short term disability and some short term disability group plans for business . Before purchasing short term disability insurance , make sure your employer does n't offer it . Here are a few on short term disability companies that come to mind Mutual of Omaha , Aflac , Lincoln Financial Group .
When changing jobs , deciding how to address your health insurance needs in the gap period between employer sponsored health insurance plans is both simpler and more complicated than ever before . The size of the employer group you are leaving will impact on your planning as well . If your employer has less than 20 employees then state continuation of coverage provisions will apply , these vary from state to state but they are usually for shorter periods of time than the Federal COBRA law requires . Employers with 20 + employees are subject to the Federal COBRA guidelines where most employees can continue their coverage for up to 18-months . Your continuation of coverage options to consider now in 2014 are ; 1 -RRB- Continuation of Coverage through Your Existing Employer 's Health Plan - you will need to notify your former employer of your intention to continue your coverage under their group plan within 63-days of your last day of employment . You must make premium payments in full and remit them in a timely manner to your former employer -LRB- or their administrator -RRB- each month to keep your coverage in effect . 2 -RRB- Short Term Medical Insurance - if you are healthy and pre-existing condition issues are not a personal concern and if you are confident that you will be obtaining new employment with benefits in the next several weeks to months then Short Term Major Medical Insurance may be an alternative to consider . Just because you can continue with your former employer 's coverage does not mean you are required to or that you will find it affordable . Short Term Medical plans are often far less expensive than group health insurance plans and in some cases may even offer you more coverage than your employer 's plan . A note of caution : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the minimum coverage requirements under the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- so a person covered by such a policy may find themselves subject to the individual mandate tax penalty for the period of the year they are insured under such plans . 3 -RRB- Obtain Individual Major Medical Insurance - maybe your prospects for being quickly hired somewhere else are not strong at this time or perhaps you are considering taking a new career path -LRB- e.g - consultant , freelancer , contractor -RRB- , having health insurance independent of your employer may be the best solution . In this event you will want to explore your health insurance plan options both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplaces and whether you would qualify for any premium tax subsidies . 4 -RRB- Qualification for Medicaid/CHIP , etc. - depending upon your income level and/or other life circumstances you may have to explore your coverage options under various state and/or Federal health benefit plans for you and/or your dependents . 5 -RRB- Go Without Coverage - not my recommendation but it is an option and an option than no small number of people choose each year . Considering the potential financial risk of an uninsured illness or injury this is really only an option of last resort and a person faced with such a situation should pursue their government coverage options if possible . That should pretty well cover all the possible ways to address your coverage needs between jobs .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How To Compare Home Insurance Rates ?
The objective of purchasing a homeowners policy should be to protect you against an unsustainable loss . The most expensive homeowners policy is the one that is inadequate when a loss occurs . The cheapest homeowners policy is the one that pays what you expect it to pay . Many think that by shopping they will save money , where the real issue is level of protection and that is very difficult to shop for . Get an agent and trust the agent to do what is right for you .
This topic must be approached with great caution !!! Those shopping for home insurance most usually get involved in a self inflicted scam of shopping unlike products and end up making a final decision on something other than their goal ! It is very difficult to compare like coverage between insurance carriers ; thus allowing a true similar comparison . Carriers sometimes offer different deductibles , different coverage limits and different endorsement options . Depending on the customer 's needs , it is often that an important item goes unchecked in haste to complete the transaction . We recommend shopping for insurance not more frequently than once every three years and taking at least an hour to go over the coverage in detail before making a change of carrier.In today 's economy , there are clients that spend 10 - 15 minutes each and every year and simply contact someone after receiving an advertisement of a lower rate ; the topic of coverage goes untouched and the client saves $ 20 over the prior carrier 's premium . The truth will come out when there is a claim and the client questions why he/she did n't have the necessary coverage ; please do not fall into this trap - it defies the purpose of purchasing the insurance coverage in the first place . In some of these ` rush ' cases , it is also possible that following an inspection of the property , the carrier legally makes necessary changes and the client ends up with a higher premium than what they originally had with the prior carrier . It is prudent to purchase insurance at least one month ahead of the desired effective date to give the new carrier time to order an inspection and send notice of any changes which the homeowner may decide against . This would also allow you time to pay your renewal and continue with the prior carrier . The best recommendation in most parts of the United States is to try and find an insurance brokerage that represents a number of carriers ; you should call and speak to a broker explaining exactly what you 're looking for and supply a copy of your current policy for the broker to properly compare the coverage and endorsements and ask the broker to contact you if they can come up with a better offer without discounting any coverage . In addition , you may wish to contact a couple of the National Captive carriers such as Allstate and State Farm and obtaining a comparison quote . This way , you can compare the work of a broker against the Captive agents of Allstate or State Farm making sure you have completed a concise and informed cycle of review . For further information , you may contact WEBSITELINK and one of our agents will be happy to answer your more specific questions !
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
To compare life insurance rates , be sure you are comparing the same type of policy to another . E.g. Comparing 10 year term to 20 year term is not a legitimate comparison . Check to see how long the rates are guaranteed not to go up . If one 20 year policy is guaranteed not to go up in price for 20 years , it is not fair to compare it to a 20 year term policy that is guaranteed not to go up in 10 years . Do not compare a policy by the rating they give you . Compare them by price . Ratings are just words . Price is where the rubber meets the road . If you have a quote for a level premium that will not go up in price , and also quotes for graded coverage/policies that can go up in price , it is usually best to go with the level premium that will not go up in price , even if it is higher .
Whenever you are comparing advertised rates of fixed annuities , it is very important to know the details behind the advertised rate . There are a multitude of variables between different companies . Many companies offer `` bonus rates '' for new investors . These bonus rates look very attractive , but are easily misunderstood . Key questions to ask are : Does the advertised rate include a bonus ? If so , what are the details ? How long is the advertised rate locked in once you invest ? Is there a guaranteed minimum interest rate ? If so , what is it ? Is there a bail-out option if the earning rate drops significantly in the future ? What are the terms ? For the right person in the right situation a fixed annuity can be a very good investment . However properly comparing annuities is more involved than comparing simpler products such as CD 's .
Long Term Care Insurance is recommended for those having considerable assets . If you needed to go to a nursing home or assisted living facility , or receive home health care to assist you with your activities of daily living -LRB- dressing , eating , bathing , etc -RRB- , those institutions can go after your savings and investments while you are alive -LRB- if your spouse is alive , he/she can keep half -RRB- , and even take the proceeds from your home after you and your spouse die . If you have very little in the way of assets , long term care insurance is an unnecessary expense . But if you have assets you would like to protect , and can afford the premium , having long term care insurance is an excellent tool in planning your future , preserving your peace of mind , and paying the bills if needed . And a word about life insurance policies with living benefits . I am all in favor of them , but you do need to consider how much is `` enough '' when purchasing life insurance that you may want to use if you can no longer care for yourself . Nursing home costs average nearly $ 80,000 per year , nationally , for a semi-private room . Someone wanting to hire a round the clock caregiver in their home can expect to pay over $ 175,000 per year -LRB- $ 20 per hour -RRB- . It can be expensive to buy a permanent life insurance policy with face amounts large enough to cover even a couple years of care . Just be sure you understand how much of the life insurance face amount is available to you , what triggers it takes to get it , and when you can get it . Then compare it to the price of buying long term care insurance providing comparable benefits .
An annuity is two things : 1 -RRB- It is a systematic way to accumulate money ; and 2 -RRB- It is a systematic way to distribute -LRB- pay out -RRB- money . When you evaluate the options , these two functions are primary to understanding what you are looking at with any annuity . I will confine my answer to helping set the table for you to be able to compare one annuity to another . As a method of systematically accumulating money in an account , you need to be at work but your money also needs to be at work . The interest rate paid on your growing fund accumulation is how your money is considered to be working for you so one of the most important things to compare would be the rate of interest to be paid on your accumulations . Ask and know if there is a minimum rate of return . Beware : Proposals can propose rates of interest to be paid that may never come true so understanding the minimum rate of interest helps . It may also help to compare the performance of the annuity in terms of interest rate paid over time . Good companies can provide you a historical log of the rates they have paid on their accounts . You should also understand what the penalties to the interest accumulation occur when your decide to move the money to another provider . These are referred to as surrender charges or early termination fees . Commonly there are surrender charges for five to seven years so you should ask and know how you will be treated if you decide to move your money into another direction . Also , ask what other charges your account may be subjected to during the life of the annuity prior to making any distribution choices . Years from now you will have choices as you decide how to turn your accumulated account into a stream of payments -LRB- or outright surrender -RRB- . If you choose to surrender the account , know and understand what types of surrender fees might apply . Do n't forget , you 'll probably face a sizable taxable event if you surrender the account for cash on the gain above basis in your account . Legitimate rollover of the funds can avoid the tax and penalties under most circumstances . Depending on the type of annuity , all the money may be subject to taxation and if you surrender prior to 591/2 years of age , there is a 10 % surtax collected by the government above and beyond all other tax calculations . Now , if you `` annuitize '' the account with the carrier handling your account , you are choosing to leave it with your annuity provider for the promise of a periodic stream of payments into the future . In most instances , once the account is annuitized , it can no longer be surrendered for cash . At this point you have selected a stream of payments for some period of time and based upon certain events in your life or your spouse , and based upon an assumed interest rate . These funds , as they are paid out , will also earn additional interest gains that are considered into the payout formula before determining the value of each monthly installment distributed to you from your account . This interest rate is usually fixed but modern variations do exist to have the interest rate move with market changes . Generally , the payout period is your lifetime , often with a minimum period of ten years . It can be longer if chosen . This would lower the monthly periodic installments because of the longer guarantee . You may also choose to have the annuity pay beyond your life and for the life of a spouse and this will further reduce the monthly payout because it is based upon a longer life expectancy of two lives . The topic of distribution is too involved to provide much meaningful help but this should help you spur a reasonable conversation about annuities and help you compare one to another .
There are many factors that affect the rates for homeowners insurance : Homeowner -LRB- insured -RRB- - The insured 's age , credit rating , loss experience , prior coveragewill affect the premium charged for a homeowners policy . Home location - Location is a very big deal . For example , a home located on the coast will be subject to a much higher premium compared to the same home located far inland due to the increased possibility of loss from wind or storm damage . Likewise , a home located in an area that has excellent fire protection -LRB- very close proximity to a fire station -RRB- will have a lower premium than the same home located in a secluded location very far away from fire protection . Home Construction - A stick-built wood frame home is more expensive to insure than the same valued home constructed of fire-resistive materials due to the increased potential for catastrophic fire loss with the former . Coverage Limits - Obviously a $ 500,000 home will cost more to insure than a similarly located/constructed $ 200,000 home .
There are many factors in determining your rates . From the age of your home the state and how far you are from the fire department and what your home is made of . Your credit can play factor also . Is it a full replacement cost policy or an actual cash policy . They key is to make sure that you are properly covered . To give you and example in Montana I have insured a 390K valued hand hewn log home for as little as 900 a year and a stick frame home work 150K for 500 a year both replacement cost and 500 Deductible . But unless you can provide more information it would be VERY difficult to even attempt to tell you how much insurance should be . contact a local agent they should be able to compare rates for you . I would not suggest purchasing just online unless you are familiar with insurance you could be purchasing something and not be covered properly .
Medicare Supplements actually supplement both parts of Medicare - Part A and Part B. Deciding which is the best supplement for you depends on several factors - some of those are your health , your financial situation and the rates in your area . The plans are Federally-standardized , so all companies are required to offer the same coverage plans -LRB- in most states -RRB- . However , rates can vary considerably . Because the coverage is the same and rates vary , it is important to compare plans on the basis of rates - both the company 's current rates and track record of rate stability if you can obtain that . Strictly speaking about the coverage , Plan F is going to offer the most comprehensive coverage , paying both of the Medicare A & B deductibles and the Medicare coinsurance . However , when it comes to comparing the actual companies that offer Plan F , it is crucial to compare on the basis on current and -LRB- projected -RRB- future rates .
Some things to look at when comparing Term Life Insurance policies are : 1 -RRB- Length of the term . Longer terms usually cost more , so if you are not comparing policies with the same term , you are not getting a valid comparison . 2 -RRB- Guarantees . If the premium is not guaranteed to stay the same for the entire term , you can not compare it to a policy that is guaranteed to stay the same for the entire term . 3 -RRB- Riders . You need to make sure each policy has the exact same riders -LRB- if any -RRB- to make an accurate comparison . 4 -RRB- Convertibility and/or Living Benefits . These add value to a policy , so keep that in mind if comparing a Term policy with these features to one that does not include them . 5 -RRB- Health Rating . One company may rate you Standard , while the other may rate you Preferred . You pretty much need to talk to an experienced agent to find your best health rating . But another factor is : 6 -RRB- Price . One company may charge you $ 100/mo for Standard , while another company may charge you $ 100/mo for Preferred . So it is important to look at price in addition to health rating . 7 -RRB- Agent . It never hurts to run your Term choices by an agent you can trust , and get their take on the comparisons . Life insurance can be complicated and agents should have the ethics to help you save money while getting the best features .
A lot of it depends on personal preference and what your concerns are . If you want to make sure it 's with a top-rated company who is financially strong and stable , you want to look at what their rating is -LRB- e.g. A.M. Best ratings : A , A + , and A + + indicate superior financial ratings -RRB- It can also be helpful to look into reviews that people say about the company - positive aspects , any major continuous issues with claims , etc. ? Another major comparative item to look at is , on average , how quickly the carrier pays claims . There 's no one company that offers the `` best '' health insurance plan . The health plan that 's going to offer you the lowest rates may not be the most suitable plan for you . Make sure to compare the benefits covered under the plan . I always recommend consulting with an experienced health insurance broker . We can compare health plans from multiple carriers to help determine which program is going to best serve your needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Let me ask you this : expensive compared to what ? A Maserati is expensive compared to a Honda . A 50 room mansion is expensive compared to a studio apartment . The cost of hiring a chief executive officer for your company is expensive compared to the cost of hiring a file clerk . I think you have to look at what youre getting for your dollar . And what your other options might be . Lets suppose you go through prequalification . Then underwriting . Then you get approved . Then you get your policy and pay for it . You submit one monthly premium payment . And then tragically , you die . Your beneficiary will then get the full benefit . Within a week or so . You may have paid only a few hundred dollars , but the benefit could be in the millions . You may paid only a few thousand dollars , but the benefit could be in the tens of millions . That is a pretty good deal . Lets suppose your premium was $ 500 a month , and your benefit was $ 5 million . That could happen , depending on age and other underwriting factors . If you decided to not purchase life insurance , how much money would you have to invest , at what interest rate , over what period of time , to accumulate $ 5 million ? The fact of the matter is that for the vast majority of people , they would end up spending much more money on that investment than they would on life insurance . So the real question is why is self-insurance so expensive ? How can buying a life insurance policy be so much cheaper than trying to fund your financial security out of your own resources ? And dont forget the big game-changing factor : we never know when our time will come . Dont assume time will be on your side so you could eventually collect the money to self-insure .
In order to effectively compare life insurance plans , you must compare `` apples to apples '' , as the saying goes . Comparing a 10 year Term premium to a 20 year Premium is not a valid comparison . You must compare 20 year Term to 20 year Term to know which has the best price . When comparing Permanent products , there are many more variables that enter into the price.Also , you must look at the guarantees , the riders , included features , and the predicted health rating of either Term or Permanent policies to make a valid comparison .
State Farm is a perfectly fine company with strong financial ratings . But , their Life Insurance is not what most agents would define as competitive . In fact , it often tends to be more expensive when compared to other companies . State Farm -LRB- and Allstate -RRB- often offer to discount your Home or Auto if you place your Life Insurance with them . On the surface it sounds like a great deal . But you need to actually compare the Home/Auto discount , to the difference in Premium for the more competitive Life Insurance Policy . Every time I have done this with a person , the lower priced Life Insurance Policy saves a lot more money than a discount other policies . Speak to an independent Agent who can compare multiple companies and show you the most competitive for your situation . Or visit a website such as the one on my profile and you can compare quotes yourself .
The best way to compare health insurance rates is to utilize an experienced broker that also has a top-rated and reliable website . You will save frustration , time and money by allowing a professional search , compare and present to you the best individual and family healthcare options in your area . That 's our job -LRB- as experienced brokers -RRB- , and by understanding new legislation , how Exchanges work , and how to maximize the federal subsidy , a consumer can be assured of receiving the best pricing and service .
Ten year term life insurance is life insurance that typically has the rate locked in for 10 years . Sometimes term policies are only guaranteed for the rate not to go up for part of the term . So do be sure , when you are comparing rates , to be sure that you are comparing policies that have premiums guaranteed not to increase for the entire term . It is a great temptation to buy ten year term life insurance because the premiums are so low compared to premiums for longer terms . However , if you need coverage longer than 10 years , it is usually a better idea to buy a policy with a longer term . Why ? Because , most likely , you are healthier now than you will be in 10 years . And at this time in history , life insurance rates are very low . So locking in historically low rates based on your current good health is almost certain to be a good deal for you for many years to come .
You can compare life insurance quotes by going to several different companies , or you can compare life insurance quotes by going to one website or agency that sells multiple companies . The advantage of doing your shopping in one place is that you will know you are comparing `` apples to apples '' . Life insurance has a dizzying amount of variables to consider , and every agent has their own idea as to what is important . When you compare quotes on a website quote engine , you are comparing the same plan against one another , although you still should visit with an agent to be sure that the one you select is one for which you actually qualify .
The cost of auto insurance on a 23-year-old will vary depending on where you live and the type of vehicle you are buying . Also , your driving record will impact the rate . Of course , if it is a newer vehicle , the rate would tend to be higher than compared to an older vehicle . Also , a married person will pay less than someone who is single . So ... how do you find out the cost ? As brokers , we research and compare rates from top-rated carriers so you get the best deal . Typically , the process only takes a few minutes , and applications can be handled online very easily .
The cost of Medigap policies can vary widely . There can be big differences in premiums that insurance companies charge for exactly the same coverage . As you shop for a Medigap policy , be sure you are comparing the same Medigap policy -LRB- for example , compare a Plan A from one company with Plan A from another company -RRB- . Each insurance company sets its own premiums . It is important to ask how an insurance company prices Medigap policies . How they set the price affects how much you pay now and in the future .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Do I Need To Do To Enroll In Medicare ?
The easiest way to enroll in Medicare is to go to the social security website , ssa.gov , and complete the application process on their website . I believe you click on the `` benefits '' tab and then click on Apply for Medicare . From there the website should provide step-by-step directions to complete the process . If you 're applying under a special enrollment period -LRB- as opposed to your initial open enrollment period when turning age 65 -RRB- , it will generally be better to complete the application process at your local social security administration office to make sure you receive the correct effective date for your Medicare program .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . When enrolling under a special enrollment period , the effective date would be the 1st of the following month after you apply . The effective date of coverage when applying during the general enrollment period will be July 1 of the year you apply . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
You can enroll in Medicare Part B when you turn 65 , when you have a special enrollment period -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 or older and coming off of group coverage -RRB- , or during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . Please note , when you enroll in Part B during the general enrollment period , your effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be eligible for Part B under age 65 if you 're on social security disability or have a specific medical condition -LRB- e.g. ESRD or ALS -RRB- and meet eligibility requirements . Please note , if you do n't enroll in Part B when you 're first eligible and you do n't have a special enrollment period available to you , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty -LRB- premium can go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have enrolled in Part B , but did not -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you also activate your 6-month open enrollment period to purchase a Medigap plan to cover the gaps in original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING ! This is the best time to buy one if you do n't want to create an extremely predictable healthcare expense structure . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
You qualify for Medicare Part A automatically at age 65 if you have paid into to Social Secuity for at least 10 quarters . You do not have to pay a premium for Part A . It has been paid for with the Medicare tax paid from payroll deductions from you and your employers during the time your work history . You also qualify for Part B Medicare at age 65 if if you qalify for Part A . You can elect to start Part B or delay it . If you elect to start Part B you will pay Medicare a premium for Part B . The amount you pay for Part B is determined by a sliding scale based on your income . The lowest Part B premium which most people pay is $ 104.90 . Three months before your 65th birthday and three months after is your open enrollment period when you are eligible to enroll in Medicare Part A and B . If you delay enrolling in Part B but stay enrolled in a qualified group health plan you can delay enrolling in Part B without penalty . If you do not enroll in Part B during your open enrollment peroid and are not enrolled in a qualified group health pay you will be charged a 10 % increase in your Part B premium each year that you day your enrollment . You can also qualify for Medicare Part A & B prior to your 65th birthday if your are approved for Disabled Social Security . If you are approved for Social Security based on a disabilty you can apply for Medicare Part A and B 24 months after you started reeciving Disabled Social Security .
Medicare Part B has several enrollment periods that you should be aware of . The enrollment period that you may qualify for may vary based on what your current situation is . The first Medicare Part B enrollment period that most people experience is the `` Initial Enrollment Period '' . This is a 7 month window that starts 6 months before the first day of the month in which you turn 65 and lasts 6 months after the month in which you turn 65 . If you enroll in Part B using this enrollment period your medicare Part B will start on the first day of the month you turn 65 or if you enroll after your 65 birthday your coverage will begin on the first day of the following month . The Part B `` General Enrollment Period '' is for individuals over 65 that do not currently have medicare part B or other creditable health coverage . This period is from Jan 1st through march 31st every year . If you enroll in part B using this General Enrollment Period your Part B coverage will start on July 1st of the same year . There is also a `` Special Enrollment Period '' that begins 63 days before and ends 63 days after the date you lost creditable health coverage from an active employer . You may also qualify for an 8 month Enrollment period that begins on the day you lose employment and/or employment based group health coverage .
Enrollment in a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan -LRB- Part D / PDP -RRB- is not mandatory . However , if you do not enroll in a Medicare approved Prescription Drug Plan , youll still need creditable prescription drug coverage to avoid a late enrollment penalty if you decide to enroll later on . To avoid the late enrollment penalty : Join a Medicare drug plan when you are first eligible and before your initial enrollment period is over . Dont allow 63 days or more in a row without a Medicare drug plan or other creditable prescription drug coverage . If you choose to delay getting a PDP plan , you are not penalized until you decide to enroll . This does come as a surprise to some people who choose to wait to buy a Medicare PDP plan after being on Medicare for some time . To calculate a late enrollment penalty fee , first determine how many months you went without creditable drug coverage . For example 43 months at a rate of $ 31.17 -LRB- 2013 -RRB- is 43 X .3117 = $ 13.40 . So , in addition to the monthly PDP premium , you would pay a $ 13.40 late enrollment penalty . You may have to pay this penalty for as long as you have a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan . In addition , the penalty rate may increase each year . This was a great question . I hope this answer was helpful .
If you are turning 65 - you can enroll up to 3 months prior to your 65th birthday with the effective date of plan being effective the first of the month - of your birth month . If you enroll a bit after -LRB- you have up to 3 months after birth month to enroll with a guarantee issue -RRB- then it would be effective the first of the month following your enrollment . So let 's say your birthday is in May : You can sign up for Medicare A & B , and your additional plan -LRB- s -RRB- Feb , March , April , May , June July and August . After that you are no longer guarantee issue and would need to wait till another enrollment period . NOW , if you are working full time and retire , this gives you yet another guarantee issue enrollment period at the month of retirement . -LRB- You still want to enroll in Medicare A & B up to 3 months before retirement - and then the additional plan -LRB- s -RRB- about 1-2 months before that start date of Medicare A & B. -RRB- If you are already enrolled in Medicare and would like to change your RX plan for 2015 then during the `` Annual Enrollment '' period , which is Oct 15th - Dec 7th 2014 - with an effective date of Jan 1 2015 , then you would want to make sure to meet with your agent during this time period . Make sure you , or they , run your RX list through a comparison tool - such as Medicare.gov - to see which of the many plans may best fit your needs . Anyone enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan or a Supplement along with an RX plan will want to review your Advantage plan or your RX plan every year during this `` Annual Enrollment '' period as plans change and your prescriptions may have changed . Always search for what may fit your needs best . If you have a Supplement plan - you typically do not ever change this plan for another - there are exceptions . Hope that clarifies . Belinda myseniorventure.com/answers
A special enrollment period for original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- is a qualification to enroll in Medicare immediately without having to wait for the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- if you did not sign up for Medicare when you were first eligible -LRB- turning age 65 -RRB- - enrolling during a special enrollment period would also allow you to avoid being subject to any late enrollment penalties . With regards to special enrollment periods for Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- and Part D -LRB- stand-alone prescription drug plans -RRB- , it 's a qualification to make changes to your program outside of the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 of each year -RRB- - Medicare supplement plans -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plans -RRB- can be changed at any time during the year . There are a number of ways someone may qualify for a special enrollment period , the most common one I see being a person leaving their employer 's group health insurance plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You will enrolled for Medicare Part A automatically when you turn 65 . If you are receiving Social Securiy you will be enrolled in Part B automatically and Social Security will start deducting your Part B premium from your monthly Social Security Benefit . If you are not receiving Social Security benefits Medicare will notify you 4 to 6 months prior to your Medicare open enrollment period that you are eligible for Medicare the first day of your birth month on your 65th birthday . Your Open Enrollment Period is a 7-month period beginning 3-months before your 65th birthday and 3-months after . You can reply to the Medicare enrollment reminder to enroll you in Medicare or you can decline Part B . If you are not receiving Social Security benefits you will have to pay the first 3-months of your Part B premium by check or money order . You can decline Part B without penalty as long as you are enrolled in an qualified employer health care plan . If you are not enrolled in such a plan you will be penalized 10 % each year when or if you apply for Part B . You can also use the Medicare.gov website to enroll online .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Asking this question tells me that you need the help of a health insurance broker familiar with your marketplace . Do a Google search , call the Better Business Bureau , look in the Yellow Pages -LRB- if any one does that anymore -RRB- , ask a friend , but get somebody to do the leg work for you . Or , of course , you can go to HealthCare.Gov and look up coverage there . When using HealthCare.Gov the consumer should understand that not all health insurance carriers are available through the government marketplaces and that provider networks and approved prescription lists may be different with the same carrier depending upon whether you are dealing with their products outside or inside of the government marketplaces . One good thing about ObamaCare is that the simple answer to your question is just `` apply with an insurance carrier . '' The bad news about ObamaCare is that they now give you a specific time of year -LRB- the open enrollment -RRB- for you to enroll in coverage and after that time only persons experiencing certain change of life status events can enroll for individual coverage outside the open enrollment period each year . You are asking this question nearly 2 months after the close of the first open enrollment period on March 31st , 2014 . If you could have enrolled during that open enrollment period but for some reason did n't and have n't experienced a change of life status event -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , having a baby , losing employer based coverage -RRB- recently then you technically ca n't enroll in major medical insurance again until January 1 , 2015 . Being uninsured will also technically make you subject to the individual mandate tax penalty when you do your individual income taxes next year . Do n't feel all alone , millions of people went through the first ObamaCare enrollment and still managed to stay uninsured . Some by intention other by inattention . If you can pass a few simple medical questions and coverage for pre-existing conditions is n't a must then I would suggest you look into getting a Short Term Medical policy to tide you over for the rest of the year . Be advised that Short Term Medical insurance is not viewedas meeting the requirements under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual mandate penalty . But , many people are finding that the cost of short term medical insurance is low enough against the prices of the new ObamaCare compliant plans that even taking the tax penalty into account they are dollars ahead with the short term policy . For advise please feel free to contact me .
Most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan . If you have any questions about your coverage or would like to review options for a Medicare supplement plan , please send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button or call me at 703-665-9133 .
Most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . Some people may be on Medicare before age 65 -LRB- certain requirements must be met such as being on social security disability/have end-stage renal disease and have been receiving benefits for 24 continuous months -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan .
No . While most people will enroll in Medicare when they turn 65 , some people can enroll before then . They must meet certain eligibility requirements such as being on social security disability/have end-stage renal disease and have been receiving benefits for 24 continuous months -RRB- . If you 're still working and have group coverage , you can elect to postpone receiving Part B until you 're ready to come off the group plan . When you 're ready to come off the group coverage , you 'll have a special enrollment period to enroll in Part B . If you do n't do it in this window , you will have to wait until the annual general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 1 -RRB- - please note , if enrolling during your general enrollment period , you will have a July 1 effective date . Part A is premium-free for most individuals because you 've been paying FICA taxes during your working life -LRB- you need 40 quarters/10 years of working life to qualify for premium-free Part A -RRB- . Part B requires a monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 - can be higher for individuals in higher income brackets - figure based on your modified adjusted gross income from your tax return from 2 years prior -RRB- . When you first enroll in Part B , you will also trigger a six-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare supplement plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is THE BEST time to buy a supplement plan - plan F is the most comprehensive plan .
No and yes . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- anyone applying for major medical health insurance coverage after January 1 , 2014 can not be denied coverage for a pre-existing health condition . Insurance coverage is guaranteed to be issued and must cover pre-existing conditions immediately . However , this does require that you enroll for individual health insurance coverage during the mandated open enrollment period which for 2014 ended on March 31st . If you failed to enroll during the open enrollment period then you can not apply for major medical insurance coverage until the next open enrollment period which begins on November 15th for an effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . The only exceptions to this part of the law are for what are referred to as `` Change of Life Status Events '' such as marriage , divorce , losing other health insurance coverage , or having or adopting a child -LRB- as the most common examples -RRB- . For the remainder of 2014 the only options available to persons who failed to enroll during the open enrollment period would be Short Term Medical insurance or perhaps a limited benefit/indemnity policy . However , these policies do still have some underwriting question associated with them that could result in your being declined for coverage . Also , these types of health plans do not cover pre-existing health conditions and do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for being major medical coverage . Therefore , you would be subject to the individual mandate tax penalty even if you do take out one of these types of policies .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
You are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part B at the same time that you are enrolled in Medicare Part A if you are receiving Social Security benefits at age 65 , you are under age 65 and have been disabled for two years , or you have ALS . If you do n't want Part B at that time , you can send in a card indicating that you do not want Part B. To sign up for it later on you should enroll during a special enrollment period to save money . Call Social Security at 1-800-772-1213 to find out if you are eligible for a special enrollment period . If not , you will need to wait until the general enrollment period Jan1 to Mar 31 , 2014 .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Life Insurance Companies Drop You ?
Assuming you mean drop you after your policy was issued and in force , the answer is no . But if during the two year contestability period , material misstatements or omissions were discovered , a life insurance company would more than likely return your premiums with interest and invalidate the policy .
Can life insurance companies drop you ? In the first two years , during the contestability period of a new policy , yes they can if they find a material misstatement on the application . Actually in some states , for certain issues the state can waive the two year limitation and extend the clause for the life of the policy . In my state , it would be misstating about smoking .
Many people worry that their life insurance policies will drop them if they develop a health condition , as can happen with health insurance . The fact is , if you filled out your life insurance application honestly , complied with whatever they asked you to do , and got a policy , that policy is yours to keep . You can have a heart attack the next month and it will pay the death benefit . You can start smoking the next year and it will pay the death benefit . You can not be dropped over something you did not know ahead of time . Given that type of guarantee , why not lock your life insurance policy in for as long as you can . If you can get coverage for 30 years or a lifetime instead of 10 , have a need for longer coverage , and can afford it , no one can take it away from you as long you keep paying the premiums .
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
That is a great question . The answer is you bet , if you 've done something to deserve it . They can not just decide one day to drop you , but if you have given them a good reason , like misrepresentation of facts , or non-payment of your policy , they will drop you like a bad habit . You may also get dropped for committing an intoxicant related felony like vehicular manslaughter . In any event , the only way they will drop you is if you have earned it . Thanks for asking !
The easy answer to drop your term life insurance is when you goal for that plan is met . For example , if you purchased the plan to cover a 30 year mortgage and paid it off early and have no further need for the protection you should drop it . If the term is met and the rates increased drastically you may want to drop it and apply for another policy if your health is still good . Another scenario may be retirement and the nest egg is fully funded with no unforeseen circumstances , it could be time to drop it or convert it to permanent life insurance or paid up life insurance if the need for a death benefit still exists .
I understand it 's hard when you have a driver with , shall we say , a less than stellar driving record . Most companies , however , will want your husband to be named on your auto insurance policy . Over the years they 've realized that people drive the cars that they own whether they 're insured on a policy or not . It 's just the reality of the situation . However , that does n't mean that your rates have to be sky-high , as you put it . There are some pointers I can give you to help minimize the impact . Your husband can get his own insurance separate from yours . If his record is bad enough that he has be placed with a non standard -LRB- high risk -RRB- company , you can still have a policy through a standard company . As long as he has insurance , he does n't have to be listed as a driver on your policy . Whether you choose to have him get his own policy or list him on yours , list him on a car that does n't have physical damage coverage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- . Physical damage coverage on a non standard policy can cost big dollars , as much as 75 % of the total cost of the insurance . Track his driving record . Any violation will eventually drop off for rating purposes . Most minor violations will drop off after two years , at fault accidents will usually drop off after three years , and major violations -LRB- DUI etc. -RRB- will drop off after five years . As soon as he 's eligible to be insured through a standard carrier , list him . Many people do n't realize this and continue to pay non standard rates even after they 're eligible . I 'll preface this last point by saying I do n't recommend it . Some companies can exclude a driver . In so doing they 're not rated on the policy and they 're record does n't matter . But realize that there is no coverage if they get into an accident , even if they 're driving a car on the policy . Once again , I do not recommend this . From time to time I see a driver that has a problem driving safely . They routinely get tickets and have accidents . Some will even just stop carrying insurance because it 's so expensive but do n't seem to see the correlation between their driving and their insurance rates . If he will , get him into a safe driving program . If he wo n't , you 'll probably be dealing with this for a long time . Good luck .
Unfortunately , the homeowners insurance company has the `` right '' non-renew your coverage each year they renew the policy . It depends on your specific state if they can drop you mid-policy or not . They normally ca n't drop you mid-policy unless they discover a material misrepresentation by you . They can drop you for non-payment , but for a claim they can only non-renew your policy . If you have additional questions please let me know .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
The single best thing you can do is shop around with other auto insurance companies . Each company is unique in that they have their own appetite for what they like and do n't like . You may fit right into some company 's `` sweet spot '' . But you will never know which companies can beat your current rates . As far as lowering premium on an active policy , you have to be careful . Normally when drivers lower their coverages or cut them out altogether , they tend to make cuts in the wrong areas . It 's important to understand the difference between a controlled risk and an uncontrolled risk . A controlled risk is one where by lowering or dropping coverage , you know the exact dollar amount of the extra risk you are taking on . This includes raising your deductibles on comprehensive and collision coverage -LRB- or dropping it altogether -RRB- , dropping additional coverage such as rental and roadside assistance/towing . Stay away from lowering uncontrolled risks ! Namely liability coverage and uninsured motorist bodily injury coverage . This is where people get burned ! Keep both of these as high as you can afford them .
Term insurance is temporary insurance , so by definition , if one buys term insurance , they will either drop the coverage oneday or convert it to permanent insurance . You should keep your term insurance for as long as it protects the risk you originally purchased it for . If your risk diminishes , you can lower coverage accordingly and reduce premiums even further . People confuse term insurance for cheap insurance . Although less expensive than permanent insurance , its costs increase as we age . It is counterintuitive but this is the reality I run into as an experienced insurance broker . People buy term insurance in their 30 's and 40 's thinking they will drop coverage in their 50 's . In their 50 's , they extend coverage into their 60 's . In their 60 's , they now realize if they drop their insurance , they are disinheriting their children of a very large asset , so the conversation reverts convert to permanent insurance . This happens more often than not .
Today a health insurance carrier can drop a policyholder in only very limited circumstances . Generally , this would have to entail some sort of fraud/misrepresentation on the part of the policyholder themselves . For example , saying you lived in one state when your residence is actually in another state . Moving from one state to another could also be a legitimate reason for a carrier to drop your coverage though this is also a qualifying event that allows to enroll in new coverage -LRB- maybe even with the same insurance carrier -RRB- in your new state of residence . Another way that some persons will eventually be impacted by ObamaCare and may perceive that their health insurance carrier is trying to drop them will be what eventually happens to policies that were taken out prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 and that have been maintained since then . While we 've all heard the `` if you like your policy you can keep it '' line , this was never the long term objective of ObamaCare . Maintaining older policies and the legacy systems to support them while also building all your new business to be compliant with the requirements of the health care reform law as a serious administrative burden and cost to the insurance carriers , state insurance departments and obviously it has been a headache for the Federal government too . The pressure will continue to build to phase out pre-ObamaCare policies which , while technically this wo n't represent a cancellation as your insurance carrier will have to offer you replacement coverage that is ObamaCare compliant , will probably feel like you 're having you coverage dropped to many people .
Many people worry that their life insurance policies will drop them if they develop a health condition , as can happen with health insurance . The fact is , if you filled out your life insurance application honestly , complied with whatever they asked you to do , and got a policy , that policy is yours to keep . You can have a heart attack the next month and it will pay the death benefit . You can start smoking the next year and it will pay the death benefit . You can not be dropped over something you did not know ahead of time . Given that type of guarantee , why not lock your life insurance policy in for as long as you can . If you can get coverage for 30 years or a lifetime instead of 10 , have a need for longer coverage , and can afford it , no one can take it away from you as long you keep paying the premiums .
Whole Life covers you for your `` whole life '' . Term Life covers you for a term , or set number of years . Whole Life has cash value that can be utilized while you are still alive . Term Life does not -LRB- except for Term with living benefits , which allows you to use part of the death benefit if certain triggers are met -RRB- . Whole Life allows you to pay the entire premium at once , or in a limited number of years , after which no more premiums are owed . Term Life requires that you make periodic payments over the entire duration of the policy . If you drop a Whole Life policy after some length of time , you will usually have a reduced paid up policy that you can keep without making further premium payments . If you drop a Term policy , your coverage ends and you do not have any return of cash -LRB- unless you buy ROP , or return of premium Term Life -RRB- . With participating Whole Life , you may get dividend checks over the years . With Term Life , the only benefit you get will be if you die before the term ends . Whole Life costs more because it is a permanent product and has cash value in addition to death protection . Term Life costs less because it is temporary and offers pure death protection .
You employer may drop your health insurance . However , there are many underwater stones involved with this executive decision . For example , the employer can not drop the coverage for you only , except when you , for example moved from Full Time to Part Time and in order to be eligible for benefits you must work full time . Or may be you were moved from employee status to 1099 ? If you 've learned that your employer dropped your health insurance , but other employees of the company still receive this benefit - contact a lawyer . This could be a basis for a lawsuit against your employer .
Great question ! There would be a couple of immediate results . The first is that you would no longer have the benefit of insurance to help pay for costs should you become sick or injured . Those costs can be devastating to your financial stability . The second is that under the Affordable Care Act , there are penalties for not having insurance , that are leveled when you file your taxes for this year . The health insurance companies limit the ability to enroll in their programs , and many workplace plans will not drop you until the open enrollment period unless you meet specified conditions.Without knowing the reason that you are considering dropping your coverage , I would ask that you would have a plan in place before you actually do drop your coverage . If I can provide more information , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Can you drop your husband from your health insurance ? Well the answer may vary by state . You may be able to drop your husband , but he will have to agree in writing for it to be done . The reason for this is when a couple divorces a spouse sometimes drops the others coverage without their knowledge . Sort of like emptying the bank account .
Dropping collision on your car depends on how much you wish to self insure . As long as you do not have a loan you can drop collision anytime . However one of the more common times to consider dropping collision is if your vehicle is worth $ 3500.00 or less . The reason for this thinking is this is the amount uninsured motorist property damage would pick up in the event you are hit by someone with no insurance . Of course your still on your own if you cause the accident or if your involved in a hit and run type situation where you do n't know who caused the accident . You may want to look at what you actually are paying for collision coverage and what the vehicle is worth in a total loss since this is all your going to get .
Several things can get you dropped from your auto insurance policy . One could be not making your payments which could result in policy termination . However assuming you make your payment on time the main reason is increased risk . A poor driving record is usually the primary contributor of your policy being non renewed . DUI 's andwrecklessdriving are top of the list or a combination of multiple accidents and moving violations will do it . You wo n't be cancelled for one or sometimes even two accidents but have that third one and in most cases you may be dropped . There are some carriers that do have a no drop promise so something to consider .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is Januvia Covered By Medicare ?
Prescription formulary is differentcarrierby carrier AND plan by plan and your location . So the answer to your question depends on your plan Best way to help you via text is to direct you to the medicare site WEBSITELINK Or call into the carrier you have and ask themspecificallyregarding the plan you bought from the , I am sorry I could not answer yes or no .
Januvia is used to treat symptoms of diabetes . While it is possible Januvia would be used for someone in hospice , you do n't have to be terminal to have Januvia as a prescribed form of treatment . Check your Medicare Part D drug formulary to determine if Januvia is on the list and if so , what your copay would be .
Medicare covers Januvia by Medicare Part D , the Medicare Prescription Drug Plan . Januvia is an oral medication that helps lower blood sugar and prevent diabetic complications in people with type 2 diabetes . It is not indicated for persons with type 1 diabetes or those with diabetic ketoacidosis . The generic name for Januvia is sitagliptin .
Januvia is used to treat symptoms of diabetes . While it is possible Januvia would be used for someone in hospice , you do n't have to be terminal to have Januvia as a prescribed form of treatment . Check your Medicare Part D drug formulary to determine if Januvia is on the list and if so , what your copay would be .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
The question is difficult to answer because of the amount of variables involved but I will try to cover all the bases . If you want a Medicare supplement that is going to cover all Medical expenses approved but not covered in full by Medicare , you would go with a plan G or Plan F. Plan G has a deductible of $ 166 but after it has been met , it is the same as a plan F which covers the $ 166 Part B deductible . So for full coverage , go with Plan F or G but they will cost you the most a well . If you have a high amount of medical care , the math will work on these plans . If you do not utilize a lot of care , you will be spending the money on premium every month but getting your moneys worth out of it . For those that have low/basic medical needs , you could try a lower cost option . Plans K , L and High F supplements can all be good options to consider . Like all Medicare supplements , you can still go to any doctor that accepts Medicare when using these plans . Depending on the state you live in and company you choose the price points will vary between the three plans . In a nutshell here is what they cover . Plan L - covers 75 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare Plan K - covers 50 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare High F - covers 100 % of costs not covered by Medicare after a deductible of $ 2,180 has been met . The deductible is not a true deductible but means that you only pay the deductibles and copays not covered by original Medicare . Original Medicare still provides the benefits you would normally get but the High F plan does not cover the left over costs until the $ 2,180 has been met . High F usually has the lowest price point of the three plans . In some states , the premium can be as low as $ 28 a month for the plan . Given it is a supplement , you would still need to buy a drug plan if you wanted RX coverage .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
Medicare can cover INR testing once a month when certain conditions are met . Typically you 'll need to consult with your doctor and have them determine if it is medically necessary and confirm with Medicare that the treatment course will be covered -LRB- would fall under Part B - your physician insurance for outpatient procedures -RRB- . Here 's a link to a publication from CMS -LRB- the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services -RRB- that provides a detailed explanation regarding INR testing , what specific conditions must be met to have it covered , and how Medicare covers it : WEBSITELINK Please note , under Medicare Part B , only 80 % of the expense would be covered by Medicare . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan , it may cover some or all of the other 20 % -LRB- depending on the plan letter you have -RRB- of the service expenses . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement , please feel free to contact me to see about qualifying for one . Medicare Supplement plans are standardized , meaning the benefits are exactly the same regardless of which insurance carrier you have the coverage through -LRB- only the price is different ! -RRB- Even if you already have a Medicare Supplement plan , I can take a quick look to see if a lower monthly premium is available -LRB- takes less than 5 minutes and I may be able to save you a ton of money on your monthly premium -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Much To Pay For Homeowners Insurance ?
How much should you pay for homeowner 's insurance ? It depends on many variables including the coverage on the dwelling , personal property , liability and other items . Naturally , where you live and what the home is insured for will play major roles in determining the premium . I know ... You want a price . How about between $ 200 and $ 1500 per year . It 's a huge range but by contacting a broker , within minutes , we can provide an exact rate .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
Owning a home can be a big investment , in terms of money , time , and memories . You should make sure that you have enough homeowners insurance to protect that investment . I always tell my clients that homeowners insurance is n't meant to pay off your mortgage if something happens to it , it should be there to rebuild your dream if something happens . I use what is known as the Reconstruction Cost to calculate how much homeowners insurance you need . That coverage amount consists not only of how much it would cost to rebuild your home , but also includes some commonly overlooked things , like cost to demolish and remove debris , and possible changes in building codes and laws that could increase the cost to rebuild . Most of the other coverage , like other structures , personal property , and loss of use coverage are a percentage of the reconstruction cost .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
Homeowners insurance is important part of helping to protect yours ' and your family financial futures . A home is a huge investment without homeowners insurance how will you rebuild after a fire or tornado . How will your protect your assets if someone is hurt on your property if you do n't have homeowners insurance ? This is just a couple of the coverages that are provided by homeowners insurance . To find out more about what a homeowners insurance policy has to offer contact your local agent .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
That 's an interesting question - do you mean how much coverage do you need to purchase to ensure the value of your belongings are covered adequately , or how much should the policy have paid out to you after your claim was processed ? In the case of coverage , you would need to have an idea of how much value there is to be insured . For example , do you have a lot of electronics , or jewelry ? If so , you would need more coverage than someone who has very few of those things . If you meant how much should you have received , that depends on a lot of things specific to your policy and claim . If you would like more information , I 'd be happy to help , just contact me . Thanks for asking !
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an independent life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a permanent be suitable to the need . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Realistically speaking , most people are not going to purchase enough coverage to cover every need that they have - many times this is because they ca n't / do not want to write the check for such a high amount . You should look at which are the most critical needs you want to meet , how long do you need to have each of them covered for - this will point you in the direction of how much coverage is appropriate to have and how long you will need it for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Factors Should Be Considered When Purchasing Long Term Care Insurance ?
Purchasing long term care insurance is a process that has many steps . Of course your budget will play a big role in the policy you ultimately buy . The assets you have , and expect to have in the future is critical along with the liquidity of those assets . As I have mentioned many times in previous questions -LRB- I guess that 's why I am an `` expert '' -RRB- your medical history will play a role in determining when and how much to purchase . This includes family history and any hazardous sports and hobbies you may engage in . A full-time experienced broker that specializes in this type of policy is your best resource . They can shop , explain and research your options . Although many folks claim to be experts , the full-time experienced agent/broker is invaluable .
Here are some factors that should be considered when purchasing long term are insurance : Family health history , family longevity , convalescent care of parents and grandparents . If your family has a chronic history of medical problems , it could present a predisposition for you . If you have family longevity with parents or grandparents , you have a greater need for extended care based on living longer . Its fascinating to observe one familys chronic convalesces versus another familys occasional use of assisted home care . And keep in mind that seniors pay around $ 250,000 in medical bills during their retirement years , some of which are extended care expenditures .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance to their clients around age 50 . But the purchasing trend of long term care appears to be around age 60 . However , if youre family has a predisposition to disease , chronic hospitalization or nursing home confinement when theyre old , you may want to consider long term care insurance when youre young and healthy . You should purchase long term care for your retirement years . The statistics are significant that youll experience a need for assisted living or perhaps nursing home confinement . The average married couple spends $ 250,000 on medical and extended care during their retirement years . Securing long term care is important , especially when youre healthy and heading into your late fifties , early sixties .
What is the best type of life insurance to purchase ? The answer depends on what you want the insurance for and for how long the coverage is needed . Life insurance basically creates cash at death which can be used to create or conserve wealth . There are additional features available depending on the type of plan and how you are planning to use it in your overall financial planning . Here are the main types of life insurance and some factors to consider : Term life insurance As the name implies , coverage is for a specified term : 5 , 10 , 20 , 30 years , etcetera . At the end of the term the term the policy renews at a higher premium . Factors to consider include : how long you need the coverage for , the rate at renewal and if you will need to convert to permanent insurance . Whole life insurance With whole your coverage is for your whole life . The factors to consider include whether the policy is participating and is eligible for dividends or non-participating . In addition the policy guarantees such as premium and cash value . The company financials and dividend history are important considerations especially when considering a participating whole life policy . Universal life insurance Coverage for your whole life if properly managed . This type of coverage offers more flexibility in premium level , insurance cost and investment options . These are all factors to consider . Working with an independent insurance broker , who understands your needs , will help you decide on the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
When purchasing life insurance it is always best , in my opinion , to sit down with a good experienced reputable agent and discuss your needs . There are a variety of products . While price is a consideration it should never be the deciding factor . If a product seems a lot cheaper than other like products there is a reason that you probably will not know about until it is too late . Consider these factors : What is the purpose of the insurance ? Is it to cover a long term need such as final expenses , or a short term need such as a mortgage ? You should use permanent insurance such as whole life to cover a long term need . Term insurance comes in all kinds of packages . One year term , 5 , 10 , 20 , and 30 are the most common . There is level term and decreasing term . Level term the death benefit stays level , decreasing term the death benefit decreases . Term insurance can be renewable or non renewable . It can be convertible to whole life or non convertible . In some term policies the rate can be adjusted according to the companies mortality history , thus it allows for premium increase . Term insurance premiums go up at each renewal . As you can see there are a variety of factors involved when buying life insurance . Unless you know and really do a lot of research on the different policies you may not purchase the best product that will meet your goals . A good independent insurance agent who specializes in life insurance and represents multiple companies can help you find the right product for your individual situation .
Actually , long term disability insurance and long term care insurance are not the same type of policy nor do they cover the same things . Disability insurance is to replace a percentage of your income when you have an illness or injury so severe you can no longer work . Long term care insurance is primarily for your aging years to cover home health , assisted living and nursing homes when you are no longer able to take care of yourself . Long term disability insurance should be purchased at a young age as soon as you go to work earning a wage . Long term care insurance should be purchased between your late 50s or early 60s .
Long Term Care and the cost associated with it is rising in the US . According to page 63 in the 2015 Medicare and You Book `` At least 70 % of people over 65 will need long-term care services and support at some point '' . It 's always important to consider factoring in those cost in your retirement planning . Cost vary from state to state , you can find a great resource that outlines these costs at WEBSITELINK No matter how you look at it Long Term Care Insurance is expensive and there is a lot of underwriting that goes with it . A viable option for a lot of families is to consider short term care insurance . Premiums are much lower and the underwriting process is much easier . Many application are approved in under a week . Short Term Care plans can pay for nursing home facility , assisted living facility , home health care , adult day care and hospice care . Feel free to contact us for more information .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
According to most sources that gather such information , the percentage of the population of the United States that owns some type of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs is around 7 % and holding . While theprobability of needing some type of extended-care for performing daily activities before death is quite high -LRB- about 1 in 4 will need up to 2 years of long-term care , slightly lower for men and higher for women -RRB- , two human factors come into play when the discussing transferring the payment of costs for such care to an insurance company : fear and denial . People are generally afraid to even consider how awful it would be to not be able to successfully perform common daily activities and need help from someone to do so . Families assume that since mom and dad took care of them as babies , they will take care of mom and dad when they need roughly the same type of attention and care . Thus , they console their elderly parents not to worry and fret about it . Others are simply in denial . `` Just take me out back and shoot me '' is a common demonstration of denial . One agent I know told me about an adult daughter that took her dad up on that . She asked , `` When should I shoot you ? '' Her father said , `` I 'll tell you when '' . So , when he started to need help getting around and the daughter offered to help , she held up a toy gun and asked , `` Now ? '' The father said , `` No , but soon . '' Of course , his condition became worse and worse until finally , he needed to be admitted to full-time care in a facility . The daughter asked again , as she had over the years , `` Do I shoot you now ? '' But , by this time , the only response her father could give was a tear . He had lost his ability to speak . Cost has become a real deterrent to the purchase of long-term care insurance . However , those that have had to go through the experience of taking care of an aged loved one usually find some way to afford at least some amount of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs . This insurance is not about the insured . It 's about the care-giver . Approximately 7 % of Americans have figured that out .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Which Health Insurance Is Best For Federal Employee ?
Unfortunately there is no simple answer to your question . Federal employees have a wide variety of health insurance plan options made available to them at every Federal open enrollment season and these options vary depending upon the employee 's geographic location . My spouse is a Federal employee so I get stuck with reviewing the options for our family every year . As every person 's health care situation is unique , their financial resources vary and you may have a choice ranging from HMO 's to high deductible Health Savings Account based plans there simply is no one size fits all answer . If you have a strong preference for certain doctors , hospitals and pharmacies then determining which plan options have these providers in-network will be a good starting point . Next you will want to examine the cost sharing arrangements in the plans that have the providers you like . This is where looking into the plan 's deductible , co-insurance and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure plus any doctor and prescription copayment features comes into play . And , last but certainly not least , will be whatthe monthly premiums are for the finalist plans that have met all your other criteria . I wish I could make life simpler for you and just say choose Plan X but the Federal Government has gone to great lengths to provide its employees lots of plans to choose from at different price points so it really defies any simple answer . Kind of like if you asked me what car would be best for you and I said a Prius only to find out you need to tow a 24-foot boat to the lake every weekend - the Prius would get you good gas mileage but might not even pull that boat out of the driveway .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
No . The employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 50 or more full-time/full-time equivalent employees . So , if your company has 20 full time employees and 6 part-time employees that probably translates into the equivalent of 23 full time employees and places you well below the threshold where you have to provide employee health insurance or be subject to the employer mandate tax penalty . If you need to attract and retain quality employees and reduce turnover then it may well be in your self interest as a small business to offer group health insurance to your employees . However , with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act 's health insurance marketplaces and premium tax subsidies to help persons between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level purchase individual health insurance the small business owner 's decision in this regard is more complicated now . If your workforce is largely lower income and you are asking or would be asking your employees to pay a significant portion of the cost of group health insurance it is possible you are actually doing your employees and their dependents a disservice by providing group health insurance as this effectively blocks them from purchasing subsidized individual health insurance in the government health insurance marketplaces . There is some analysis required and business philosophy decisions to be made by the small business owner in making the decision as to whether offering group health insurance is the best course of action in todays environment . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance broker who is well educated on the Affordable Care Act to help you make this decision . I am a 30 year industry veteran and Chartered Benefit Consultant , if I can be of assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
Unfortunately there is no simple answer to your question . Federal employees have a wide variety of health insurance plan options made available to them at every Federal open enrollment season and these options vary depending upon the employee 's geographic location . My spouse is a Federal employee so I get stuck with reviewing the options for our family every year . As every person 's health care situation is unique , their financial resources vary and you may have a choice ranging from HMO 's to high deductible Health Savings Account based plans there simply is no one size fits all answer . If you have a strong preference for certain doctors , hospitals and pharmacies then determining which plan options have these providers in-network will be a good starting point . Next you will want to examine the cost sharing arrangements in the plans that have the providers you like . This is where looking into the plan 's deductible , co-insurance and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure plus any doctor and prescription copayment features comes into play . And , last but certainly not least , will be whatthe monthly premiums are for the finalist plans that have met all your other criteria . I wish I could make life simpler for you and just say choose Plan X but the Federal Government has gone to great lengths to provide its employees lots of plans to choose from at different price points so it really defies any simple answer . Kind of like if you asked me what car would be best for you and I said a Prius only to find out you need to tow a 24-foot boat to the lake every weekend - the Prius would get you good gas mileage but might not even pull that boat out of the driveway .
Group health insurance is a health insurance policy or plan -LRB- depending upon how it is funded -RRB- that is provided by an employer for its employees or through an organization such as a labor union for its members . In a group health insurance policy situation the employer is the actual policy holder and its employees and covered dependents are subscribers who receive a certificate of coverage . In this context the employee 's health insurance is tied to their place of employment and while -LRB- depending upon the size of the group -RRB- there are state and federal laws that allow for an ex-employee to continue their coverage through the group plan for some defined period of time , eventually a former employee will lose access to their ex-employer 's group plan and have to replace it coverage from a new employer or individual health insurance . With the latest round of implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- effective January 1 , 2014 group health insurance is in many ways more complicated than ever before . For instance , employers in the 2 to 50 employee market segment in the vast majority of statesnow operate in a community rated situation and are finding that new benefit plan designs are being presented to them that may differ significantly from their current rate structures and plan designs . Fully insured ACA compliant health plans for the 2 to 50 market segment are now guaranteed to be issued , are not subject to underwriting and can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods -LRB- just to highlight some of the most major changes -RRB- . Larger sized groups , while they are certainly impacted by the effects of the ACA , are still operating under a mix of the old rules and the new ones . So , right now groups with 51 + employees are still subject to underwriting , though the new ACA rules will be migrating up the ladder to apply to groups in the 51 to 99 employee range in the future . There will be groups who will be winners and losers under the requirements of the ACA and depending upon the composition of the group and its average income levels for its workforce , some employers may find that providing group health insurance is no longer in the best financial interest of many of their employees when compared with the subsidized individual health insurance that many of their employees could qualify for . If you are an employer faced with these issues and are looking for experienced guidance on these matters please feel free to contact me for a consultation .
Federal Disability Insurance may be a reference to Federal Employee Disability Insurance . If so , it is private disability coverage that can be purchased by federal employees to supplement the federally provided plans , FERS and CSRS . Or Federal Disability Insurance may be referring to Social Security Disability benefits paid to qualified disabled persons by the federal government .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
Up until recently , federal employees were not offered short term disability or long term disability insurance . If a federal employee was disabled for over a year and met the length of employment guidelines , they could take advantage of a disability retirement program . However , federal employees are now offered a choice of disability plans through FedAdvantage to fill in the gaps in their federal benefits .
With the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- that became effective January 1 , 2014 , the differences in what group and individual health insurance cover are virtually nonexistent . The removal of underwriting , pre-existing condition exclusions and/or limitations and the addition of guaranteed issue and maternity coverage to both policy types has furthered leveled the playing field between group health and individual health insurance products . The crucial advantage group health plans continue to enjoy versus their individual market counterparts are tax issue related . What an employer contributes towards the health insurance coverage of their employees is a deductible business expense and in some small group cases may even qualify for a tax credit . In addition , employees can pay for their share of group health premiums using pre-tax dollars under a Section 125 Plan . Pre-tax treatment of employee contributions not only saves employee 's money , it reduces net taxable payroll which in turn lowers employer FICA matching expenses which is a further tax savings . For most individuals who purchase and pay for individual health insurance on their own there are none of these associated tax benefits . That is not to say that some individuals can not structure their business affairs to get some tax advantages in the individual marketplace but , after the ACA , our system is now set up to continue to tax favor group policies versus individual policies and to tax favor individual health insurance policies via subsidies up to certain income levels up to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
There is federal life insurance offered to federal employees in a group policy , called FEGLI -LRB- Federal Employees Group Life Insurance -RRB- . There is also a mutual life insurance company called Federal Life Insurance Company -LRB- Mutual -RRB- . The company 's home office is in Riverwoods , IL , and it sells life insurance and annuities .
Persons eligible for coverage and who were covered under the employer 's group health plan as of the date of the termination of employment of the employee are eligible for COBRA continuation . Generally this means the employee themselves and possiblytheir spouse and/or children . The COBRA Federal continuation requirements apply to companies with more than 20 employees , groups smaller than this operate under guidelines from their state insurance commissions that vary from state to state and are often not totally consistent with COBRA legal requirements . The most notable area of difference usually being the period of time a person can continue their coverage through the group . As such , the size of the employer group a person is leaving can also determine whether or not COBRA applies to them at all . One of the reasons COBRA was originally implemented was to keep people with pre-existing medical conditions from immediately losing their health insurance coverage when they lost a job . Since January 1 , 2014 pre-existing condition exclusions and underwriting have been eliminated and all individual policies have become guaranteed to be issued . In addition , for individual health insurance plans bought through the government health insurance marketplaces people can be eligible for premium subsidies with income levels up to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level . For these reasons , while COBRA continuation continues to exist , it is now only an option to be considered for an ex-employee and COBRA continuation is now often not the most cost effective option available . Exploring your options in the individual marketplace definitely makes sense and you should seek out the services of a health insurance broker who represents multiple carriers with products both inside and outside of the government marketplaces .
When changing jobs , deciding how to address your health insurance needs in the gap period between employer sponsored health insurance plans is both simpler and more complicated than ever before . The size of the employer group you are leaving will impact on your planning as well . If your employer has less than 20 employees then state continuation of coverage provisions will apply , these vary from state to state but they are usually for shorter periods of time than the Federal COBRA law requires . Employers with 20 + employees are subject to the Federal COBRA guidelines where most employees can continue their coverage for up to 18-months . Your continuation of coverage options to consider now in 2014 are ; 1 -RRB- Continuation of Coverage through Your Existing Employer 's Health Plan - you will need to notify your former employer of your intention to continue your coverage under their group plan within 63-days of your last day of employment . You must make premium payments in full and remit them in a timely manner to your former employer -LRB- or their administrator -RRB- each month to keep your coverage in effect . 2 -RRB- Short Term Medical Insurance - if you are healthy and pre-existing condition issues are not a personal concern and if you are confident that you will be obtaining new employment with benefits in the next several weeks to months then Short Term Major Medical Insurance may be an alternative to consider . Just because you can continue with your former employer 's coverage does not mean you are required to or that you will find it affordable . Short Term Medical plans are often far less expensive than group health insurance plans and in some cases may even offer you more coverage than your employer 's plan . A note of caution : Short Term Medical policies do not meet the minimum coverage requirements under the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- so a person covered by such a policy may find themselves subject to the individual mandate tax penalty for the period of the year they are insured under such plans . 3 -RRB- Obtain Individual Major Medical Insurance - maybe your prospects for being quickly hired somewhere else are not strong at this time or perhaps you are considering taking a new career path -LRB- e.g - consultant , freelancer , contractor -RRB- , having health insurance independent of your employer may be the best solution . In this event you will want to explore your health insurance plan options both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplaces and whether you would qualify for any premium tax subsidies . 4 -RRB- Qualification for Medicaid/CHIP , etc. - depending upon your income level and/or other life circumstances you may have to explore your coverage options under various state and/or Federal health benefit plans for you and/or your dependents . 5 -RRB- Go Without Coverage - not my recommendation but it is an option and an option than no small number of people choose each year . Considering the potential financial risk of an uninsured illness or injury this is really only an option of last resort and a person faced with such a situation should pursue their government coverage options if possible . That should pretty well cover all the possible ways to address your coverage needs between jobs .
Yes , but not just because someone in the front office feels like picking on you that day . There would have to be some change in your eligibility status or what the company 's policy is to trigger such an event . For example , you had your working hours reduced below 30 hours per week and this puts you below both your employer 's and the Federal government 's definition of what a full-time eligible employee is -LRB- 30 or more hours per week defines a person as full-time for benefits eligibility under ObamaCare -RRB- . This could trigger your still being an employee but no longer being eligible for their group health insurance plan . If you are responsible for paying a portion of your health insurance premium -LRB- and most employees are these days -RRB- and for some reason you are unable to pay your share of the premium -LRB- usually hard to do since these payments are generally taken out on a payroll deduction basis -RRB- then you could be terminated for non-payment of premium . Of course , if your employer decides to terminate their group health insurance plan entirely and you are dropped from coverage because a group plan no longer exists at your workplace you are obviously dropped . Though usually even small employers will try to give advance notice and employers -LRB- especially larger ones -RRB- are required to give a certain amount of advance notice of a plan change or termination . But you ca n't be dropped from your employer 's coverage in an arbitrary manner while still an employee meeting all the eligibility requirements set forth under your employer 's personnel policies and state and Federal laws . For example , you could n't be terminated from the health insurance plan simply because your were running up a lot of expenses for your cancer treatment .
It depends upon the circumstances of your departure . In the extreme case where a person is `` terminated for cause '' , punching the boss in the nose for example , then your coverage may be terminated as you are heading out the door . While each employer has their own internal personnel policies regarding employees leaving the job , generally you will be covered until the end of your last month of employment because you have probably had money withheld from your paycheck to pay for that month 's premium . When an employee resigns from a company or is terminated/laid off under normal circumstances then the ex-employee has the legal right to continue their coverage under their former employer 's health plan for some period of time . If the employer has less than 20 employees then state continuation provisions -LRB- which vary from state to state -RRB- will apply . If the employee has 20 or more employees then the Federal COBRA provisions apply where most people can continue their coverage for up to 18-months and even longer in some situations such as divorce . It is the ex-employee 's responsibility to inform their former employer that they will be continuing their coverage and it is the ex-employee 's responsibility to pay the full premium on time each month .
What do you mean by government health insurance ? If you are asking about a government health insurance plan such as Medicaid then I guess you could say it 's cheap as that is a program for the poor for which they do n't really pay anything . If you are asking about health insurance for Federal government employees they have many health insurance plan options at different price points to choose from . I do n't think many government employees think their health insurance is cheap even though their coverage is largely paid for by the government . Certainly in comparison to most of their peers in private sector companies these days most government employees pay less for their health insurance coverage .
An FSA is the abbreviation for a Flexible Spending Account plan which is an IRS approved means of allowing employees to set aside payroll deducted dollars on a pre-tax basis to use for several different types of employee personal expenses . Most people encounter an FSA in the context of setting aside money to cover medical , dental or vision expenses not covered by their group health insurance plan but you are not required to be enrolled in a health insurance plan in order to take advantage of your employer 's FSA plan . Also , there are types of FSAs -LRB- Dependent care is an example -RRB- that I wo n't go into at this time . For 2014 the maximum amount an individual can set aside in an FSA has been reduced to $ 2500 . But this change has been somewhat offset by a change to the `` use it or lose it '' rule which in past years meant that any unused dollars in an FSA account at the end of the plan year were forfeited by the account holder . Now up to $ 500 in unused FSA funds can be rolled over from one plan year to the next . Such rolled over funds do not count against the $ 2500 maximum deduction the employee can make in the subsequent FSA plan year so some accumulation in now allowable if your employer has amended their FSA plan document to allow for this . An additional take away though is that over the counter medications are no longer eligible for reimbursement from an FSA . Setting aside funds in an FSA account reduce the employee 's gross taxable income on a dollar for dollar basis . So , depending upon the tax bracket an employee is in , the potential tax savings could be in the 25 % to 40 % range when Federal , Social Security and possibly state taxes are taken into account . An FSA can be a very cost effective tool in helping employees get more value by paying for eligible out-of-pocket expenses .
How Employer Health Insurance started ? 1920-1930 : The Rising Price of Medical Care In 1929 two doctors Ross and Loos formed Ross Loos Clinic to provide medical care for 2,000 employees of the water department of Los Angeles for $ 1 per month per employee . Ross Loos grew to 29 locations in LA to provide medical care for city employees at a fixed cost per month whether they visited the doctor or not . The precursor to Blue Cross was founded in 1929 by a group of Dallas teachers who contracted with Baylor University Hospital to provide 21 days of hospitalization for a fixed $ 6.00 payment . The Baylor plan developed as a way to ensure that people paid their bills . 1930-1940 : The Birth of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Pre-paid hospital service plans grew over the course of the Great Depression . Pre-paid hospital care was mutually advantageous to both subscribers and hospitals during the early 1930s , when consumers and hospitals suffered from falling incomes . The AHA designed the Blue Cross guidelines so as to reduce price competition among hospitals . Prepayment plans seeking the Blue Cross designation had to provide subscribers with free choice of physician and hospital , a requirement that eliminated single-hospital plans from consideration . Despite the success of Blue Cross and pre-paid hospitalization policies , physicians were much slower in providing pre-paid care . Blue Cross and Blue Shield developed separately , with little coordination between them . Physicians worried that a third-party system of payment would lower their incomes by interfering with the physician-patient relationship and restricting the ability of physicians to price discriminate . In the 1930s , physicians were faced with two situations that spurred them to develop their own pre-paid plans . Blue Cross plans were becoming popular , and some physicians feared that hospitals would move into the realm of providing insurance for physician services , thus limiting physician autonomy . Advocates of compulsory health insurance looked to the emerging social security legislation as a logical means of providing national health care . Physicians began to organize a framework for pre-paid plans that covered physician services . In 1939 , the California Physicians ' Service -LRB- CPS -RRB- began to operate as the first prepayment plan designed to cover physicians ' services . Open to employees earning less than $ 3,000 annually CPS provided physicians ' services to employee groups for the fee of $ 1.70 per month for employees . The AMA encouraged state and local medical societies to form their own prepayment plans . These physician-sponsored plans ultimately affiliated and became known as Blue Shield in 1946 . Blue Shield plans offered medical and surgical benefits for hospitalized members . Doctors charged patients who were subscribers to Blue Shield the difference between their actual charges and the amount for which they were reimbursed by Blue Shield The market for health insurance exploded in size in the 1940s , growing from a total enrollment of 20 million in 1940 to nearly 142 million in 1950 . During WWII there was a wage freeze however the Federal government permitted employees to provide benefits instead of wages . Companies began offering health insurance to employees and the employer sponsored health insurance market exploded .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Who Qualifies For Disability Insurance ?
In order to qualify for disability insurance you must be a favorable risk in a few different categories . First is your occupation . The underwriter will want to know your employment history , job duties , earnings , net worth , education to that job and skill levels . Next is your health history . The underwriter will want to know your age , build , health history and will want you to take a paramed exam for fluid samples . Last is your lifestyle . The underwriter will want to know if you use tobacco products , drugs both illegal and prescription , your extracurricular activities , if you exercise regularly and any above normal risks . As you can see underwriting a disability insurance plan is very extensive . I would recommend using an experienced independent broker to help you navigate these plans and requirements .
You first must establish verifiable income , generally for two years . Tax returns or W2s should serve as evidence of compensation . Self-employed persons may have additional requirements . The second item of qualification is your medical health condition and prior history . Then what amount do you want to cover from your varied income ? Compensation based on the average no frills disability insurance policy that can pay 60 % of your pay tax free , up to 80 % of your pay if you deduct the disability premium as a business expense .
To qualify for disability insurance , a person must be working -LRB- likely more than 30 hours per week -RRB- , earn an gross income before taxes in excess of $ 18,000 per year -LRB- this number varies by the insurance companies in the market -RRB- , be in an occupation that is insurable , not have serious pre-existing medical conditions , and have a `` lifestyle '' that is not considered dangerous or hazardous -LRB- such as dangerous avocations , a bad driving record , etc -RRB- . These are not the only issues , but the most obvious ones . Consult a trusted insurance advisor to review your particular situation .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
Determining whether a disability will qualify you for a claim depends upon the policy 's `` definition of disability '' . It 's not something where one type of disability is covered and another may not be just because it 's a different kind . It 's about whether your specific disability is covered under policy 's definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important factor under any disability insurance policy . A disability insurance policy will have 1 of 3 definition options -LRB- varies by carrier - some may only offer one definition , others may offer more than one as it would then depend upon type of disability policy being set up -LRB- e.g. long-term vs. short-term , group vs. individual , etc. -RRB- -RRB- - 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation , 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation , and 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation . True Own Occupation is the most desirable definition you can have on a disability policy . This says that you are considered completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , EVEN IF YOU ARE WORKING AT ANOTHER JOB -LRB- this last part is key ! -RRB- . Modified Own Occupation is the most common definition that policies offer in today 's marketplace . Under this definition , you are completely disabled if -LRB- due to injury or sickness -RRB- you are not able to perform the duties of your job , AND ARE NOT WORKING IN ANY OTHER JOB -LRB- again , this last part is key ! -RRB- . Gainful Occupation is typically seen in group disability policies and policies offered by property and casualty companies that offer disability policies . This definition is the most stringent saying that you ca n't work in your own occupation and unable to work in any gainful occupation for a period of time -LRB- e.g. 12 months , 24 months , etc. - can vary by company -RRB- . Also , whether you want to buy a short-term disability policy or a long-term disability policy is important too . You can have a combination of both . I would recommend reviewing your needs and goals with an independent agent who works with multiple carriers and can help determine the program structure that will best serve your needs because disability policies are very customizable as there are a number of additional options to choose from that affect the rates . It 's not a `` just pick and choose who has the lowest rates '' type of insurance - you really want to make sure you 've got the right coverage for what you 're trying to accomplish . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
An excellent question and one to which the answer will vary upon the purpose of the disability insurance policy for which the sole proprietor purchased the coverage . Most people only think about disability insurance for purposes of replacing their personal income during a period of disability . However , for business owners there is often the additional need to protect themselves in regard to the fixed expenses of their business that will continue regardless of whether or not the sole proprietor can work and generate income . The rent/lease for office space , utilities and other such business expenses are examples . If the disability insurance policy is taken out specifically to reimburse a sole proprietor for overhead expenses incurred during a period of disability then the cost of the disability policy is considered an ordinary and necessary business expense and would qualify as a deductible business expense . To qualify the policy must state specifically that the policy proceeds are to be used to cover business expenses during the period of disability . This is separate and distinct from a disability insurance policy a sole proprietor might want to take out to replace their income . Deducting this type of disability policy as a business expense is not a good idea as I do n't believe it meets the IRS criteria and if you did deduct such a disability policy as a business expenses it is highly likely that in the event of a disability claim the policyholder would have to pay income taxes on their disability insurance payments and thus reduce the net income amount the sole proprietor would receive during their disability period .
Can disabled people get life insurance ? This is an excellent question . There are some simplified issue policies that decline people on disability , as if all disabilities are the same . And disability is used as a factor in determining the health rating for many medically underwritten policies . So your question is very valid . The answer is `` yes '' , disabled persons can get life insurance . But they need to apply for a policy that fits their particular reason for disability . E.g. . If you use a cane for an old knee injury , you should pay much less than a person who usesa cane because he/she had toes amputated for diabetic complications . But if you do not use a company that is suited to your reason for disability , you may find yourself paying the higher price simply because you use a cane . The causes of disability are as varied as the number of illness and injuries that exist . And insurance companies sometimes treat those who receive Social Security Disability or private disability insurance as different from those who receive military disability benefits . So it does take an impaired risk life insurance broker with knowledge of multiple health conditions to sift through all your choices and find you the best one .
To qualify for Disability Insurance , applicants need to show that they do not have an exceptionally high risk of becoming disabled . Having a health condition that lends itself to becoming disabled , even though the risk of death is very low -LRB- e.g. MS -RRB- will make it difficult to get a Disability Insurance policy . The applicant must also earn an income . Stay at home workers who are not compensated are unable to qualify for disability insurance .
As with so many things in life , the answer is `` it depends '' . If you are talking about Social Security disability benefits it will depend upon the type of disability benefit you are receiving . Supplemental Security Income -LRB- SSI -RRB- disability benefits , which are for certain low income individuals e.g. - blind , aged , disabled and below certain income thresholds -RRB- who do not qualify for regular Social Security Disability can not have their SSI payments garnished for child support . On the other hand , standard Social Security Disability payments can be garnished to meet child support obligations . While it is much more complicated , it is also possible that a portion of VA disability benefits can be garnished for child support . Finally , if you are receiving disability payments through an individual or group disability insurance policy those payments can be garnished for child support purposes though the specifics vary from state to state .
The first thing you need in order to qualify for Disability Insurance is an income . Unfortunately , DI does not cover people who are not bringing in an actual paycheck , even if they are working at home or for a contributing their labor to a charity . Secondly , you need to qualify medically . Disability policies sometimes exclude pre-existing conditions so that you can get the policy even if you have a health condition . Other policies will cover those health conditions , and some will decline if certain health conditions are present . Finally , you need to be at an occupation that is able to be covered . You may be unable to get Disability Insurance if you work in a very dangerous occupation . A Disability Insurance broker that carries several different companies can help match you with the best policy for which you do qualify .
The VA offers life insurance for Veterans under certain conditions : 1 -RRB- Those separating from the service may convert their Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- to Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- for 120 days after release from active duty . With a statement of good health this can be extended one year . 2 -RRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -LRB- S-DVI -RRB- provides life insurance to Veterans who have been given a VA rating for a new service-connected disability in the last two years . Totally disabled veterans can get free coverage . 3 -RRB- Disabled Veterans who have qualified for a VA Specially Adapted Housing -LRB- SAH -RRB- grant may obtain Veterans ' Mortgage Life Insurance -LRB- VMLI -RRB- . Unfortunately , the VA does not offer coverage to Veterans who do not meet these parameters .
To be eligible for Disability Insurance -LRB- DI -RRB- , you must have health that meets the company 's underwriting guidelines for that policy . It is harder to qualify medically for Disability Insurance than it is for Life Insurance , because so many more health conditions can cause a Disability than can cause a death . But a good Disability Insurance brokers can guide you to the right policy . You must also have an income in order to be eligible for Disability Insurance . Homemakers or others who do not receive a steady income are , unfortunately , ineligible for coverage . And some occupations will disqualify you . That being said , most people can get Disability Insurance and it is a very important part of a secure financial portfolio . A good Disability Insurance agent will be an immense help to you in determining whether you are eligible for affordable DI coverage .
If you qualify for Social Security Disability and are disabled for two years you will qualify for Medicare . I have many clients on Medicare and Social Security Disability . The key here is Social Security Disability . If you are collecting on a private disability policy and you are not yet on Social Security Disability then you can not get Medicare .
Everyone who has to pay their own bills , or has family relying on their paycheck , probably needs Disability Insurance . Unfortunately , not everyone can qualify for DI due to health reasons or hazardous occupations . But if you can qualify for Disability Insurance , you should probably get it . Being unable to work for an extended period of time due to illness or injury is not uncommon . Being able to receive cash payments from your Disability Insurance policy while being disabled can be a great help .
You normally need to be age 65 to get Medicare . You are automatically enrolled in Medicare at age 65 if you or your spouse has paid Medicare taxes for at least 40 quarters . You can get Medicare under age 65 if you have received Social Security Disability benefits for 24 months , are disabled and have ALS , or have worked for a government job long enough to qualify for Social Security Disability benefits . You might also qualify under age 65 if your partner has died or you are divorced from a partner who qualified for Medicare , or if you have received a kidney transplant or dialysis , in some situations .
When reviewing your disability insurance options , you should be sure to understand the differences between company contracts . With disability insurance , the key to the contract is the definition of disability and definition and requirements of the policy benefits . All disability contracts are NOT created equal . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . Guardian offers this definition and is our group 's top disability company to write business with . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Retirement , Survivors , and Disability Insurance is a reference to three of the benefits that Social Security pays to those who have paid into Social Security taxes . The `` retirement '' part refers to Social Security income that people get when they retire . the `` survivors '' part refers to the Social Security income benefits paid to dependents of a qualified deceased person . And the `` disability '' part refers to Social Security Disability benefits disabled persons receive if they are qualified .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Does State Farm Sell Disability Insurance ?
State Farm lists three types of Disability Insurance on their website : Disability Income Insurance , Mortgage Disability Income Insurance , and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance . The Disability Income Insurance provides payments to the insured during a period of disability so that they can pay for an incurred expenses . State Farm also sells Group Long Term Disability Insurance .
State Farm lists three types of Disability Insurance on their website : Disability Income Insurance , Mortgage Disability Income Insurance , and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance . The Disability Income Insurance provides payments to the insured during a period of disability so that they can pay for an incurred expenses . State Farm also sells Group Long Term Disability Insurance .
State Farm does have Disability Insurance that it offers for purchase . Their plans include regular Disability Insurance that pays a benefit to the disabled person to be used as they wish , which State Farm calls Disability Income Insurance . State Farm also offers Mortgage Disability Income Insurance and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
Yes , State Farm does offer Long Term Disability Insurance under the name , `` Disability Income Insurance '' . State Farm also offersMortgage Disability Income Insurance and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance . You would need to contact a State Farm agent to apply for this coverage .
State Farm does not offer private Short Term Disability Insurance . At this time , the only carriers that I am aware of that offer that type of coverage are Mutual of Omaha and Assurity . State Farm does offer long term Disability Income Insurance , Mortgage Disability Income Insurance , Individual Credit Disability Insurance , and Group Disability Insurance .
State Farm does sell annuities in most states . Check with a local agent to make sure they are available in your state . To learn about State Farms annuity products go to their website WEBSITELINK It looks like they offer three products . Future Wealth Builder , Future Income Plus , and Guaranteed Income .
State Farm offers home insurance in most US states , but may not beselling new policies inevery state . For example , due to the risk of catastrophic claims costs from hurricanes , State Farm does not sell new home insurance policies in Florida.Contacta local State Farm agent , and they can let you know if State Farm home insuranceis available in your state .
Yes , State Farm does offer life insurance . However , I have some clients who bought State Farm life insurance and then ended up buying different policies because they were much less expensive . Shopping for life insurance with an independent agent like myself gives you access to over 70 A rated or better life insurance companies . Many of these life insurance companies offer policies less expensive than State Farm and they may be less restrictive when it comes to certain health conditions . If you use State Farm for your other insurance needs , I would highly recommend you shop your life insurance with an independent agent because you will most likely save a significant amount of money .
Yes , the Farm Bureau does offer life insurance . You can contact your state Farm Bureau to find an agent . Or you can get a quote via the internet from United Home Life , of whom the parent company is United Farm Family Life Insurance Co , which operates as a subsidiary of the Indiana Farm Bureau . UHL provides life insurance in most states .
State Farm agents do sell health insurance but it is not a State Farm product . The carrier has a marketing agreement with Assurant -LRB- Time -RRB- to offer their products in select states . In most states Assurant is not competitive and is making noise like it may not be around post 2014 when Obamacare kicks in . Just something to consider . Also , your SF agent may not understand the intricacies of health insurance and may fail to fully explain your options and how the plan works . Assurant is like most other carriers They have some OK policies and some that stink .
In Wisconsin Rural Mutual Insurance Company which is a part of Farm Bureau Financial Services offers renters insurance . I can only speak for Wisconsin , but Farm Bureau Financial Services does operate in other states within the United States and handles personal lines with other companies in those states . If you are in Wisconsin give me a call and I can try to help you with coverage if you are not in Wisconsin , then I would suggest contacting your local Farm Bureau office to ask them for a local agent .
I agree with what Tyler said . As a rule , most property and casualty companies -LRB- that mainly sell auto , homeowners and business insurance -RRB- are worth looking at but definitely not the ONLY place you want to look for life insurance . State Farm is a top rated insurance company and is a brand you should consider in your research . A wise consumer should always shop all insurance purchases against dozens of other companies before making a purchase . If the savings are substantial , I would buy elsewhere . If the price is close ... State Farm is fine . An independent insurance broker can help you shop dozens of companies all at one time .
J. T. Miller Co , Inc , sells credit life insurance . Pekin Insurance sells credit life insurance through a network of financial institutions and auto dealerships . State Farm sells Mortgage Life Insurance . Credit Unions , financial institutions , and lenders for home mortgages or auto loans are places where credit life insurance can often be purchased .
Health insurance through state farm is actually completed through Assurant Health -LRB- via a partnership with the carrier - state farm does not sell health insurance plans themselves -RRB- . The cost for health insurance varies from person to person . Your age , where you live , if you use tobacco products , which plan you choose -LRB- e.g. metal level -RRB- , and if you qualify for a subsidy to reduce your premium will determine how much a good policy is going to cost . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . All of the plans offer good coverage . A silver or gold plan are your middle of the road type of plans because they provide strong coverage at an affordable price . I always recommend consulting with an experienced health insurance broker before you apply for anything . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Farm Bureau does not underwrite and issue health insurance under their own brand name . But in some states Farm Bureau may have a marketing arrangement with health insurance carriers allowing their agents to offer health insurance to Farm Bureau policyholders . This type of arrangement is not unusual and widely used by multi-line carriers .
State Farm is a good company , and their term life insurance is good . Like every other insurance company , State Farm has people they can not insure , and people who will get good prices with them . You can go to a website to compare quotes from other companies to the State Farm quote you have . Be sure that you are comparing the same term length and the rating for which you qualify . You might qualify for a different health rating with different companies . An agent can pinpoint that for you .
Currently , the largest US auto insurance company is State Farm , assuming we use written premiums as the criteria . State Farm has offices throughout the US . Following State Farm is Warren Buffet 's Berkshire Hathaway -LRB- Geico and other companies -RRB- , Allstate , Progressive , Farmers and USAA . Of course , these rankings change fairly often . In fact , Berkshire just recently passed Allstate for the Number 2 position . Many local companies in your area may not be the biggest carriers , but still write a lot of local business . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker since 1980 and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates .
I used to work for State Farm before becoming an independent insurance broker . Here are your options in the order that I would recommend them . 1 -RRB- Call your State Farm Agent . He or she can take down the claim information and submit it to the claims department for you . Your agent might also be able to tell you what is likely and unlikely to be covered by your policy . He/She will also be able to explain the claims process and provide you with updates . 2 -RRB- Call the claims department directly at 800-782-8332 . They can take your call 24 hours a day 7 days per week . 3 -RRB- File your claim online at WEBSITELINK 4 -RRB- Download the State Farm App and file a claim with your mobile device .
Yes , State Farm does offer Disability Insurance . Their Long Term Disability policy goes under the title , `` Disability Income Insurance '' . Mortgage Disability Income Insurance and Individual Credit Disability Insurance are other variations of Disability Insurance that State Farm offers .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Is The Grantor Of An Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust ?
The Grantor of an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is the person who creates the trust . He/she is usually the Insured person on the policy that is put under the ownership of the trust , and is usually also the Owner of the policy , thus transferring ownership to the irrevocable life insurance trust .
When talking about a life insurance trust , most people are referring to an irrevocable trust set up for tax purposes . While a living trust is simply a trust made while the grantor is living , when most people refer to living trusts they are referring to revocable trusts . A life insurance trust is usually a living irrevocable trust : set up during the grantor 's lifetime but unable to be changed or revoked .
There are many scenarios when the use of an irrevocable life insurance trust can be helpful . As the name says , it 's an irrevocable trust . Once the grantor contributes an item to the trust -LRB- e.g. life insurance death benefits -RRB- , they can not make any changes to the terms of the trust or take anything back out of it . It 's commonly used for estate planning purposes . When an ILIT is the owner and beneficiary of a life insurance policy , the death benefits wo n't be included in the calculation of the gross estate of the insured - when life insurance is paid to an individual , they are included in the insured 's taxable estate . Another common scenario is to control how proceeds are distributed to minors , or in some cases a financially irresponsible adult . For example , you have an individual who is not yet a legal adult and stands to inherit a substantial amount of money from the death of the insured -LRB- e.g. parent -RRB- . An ILIT can be set up to have a percentage paid out at age 21 , then another percentage at age 25 , and the rest at age 30 -LRB- or whatever alternate payout structure is desired when the ILIT is set up -RRB- .
Generally speaking , an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is set up my those who wish to fund it , i.e. the grantors . Thegrantorsset up the trust , pay premiums into the trust and the trust purchases life insurance for the trustbeneficiaries The grantors are required to have an arms lengthagreementwith the trust and can not benefit from it directly . Before moving forward setting up an ILIT , consult your estate and probate attorney toestablishyour suitability as grantor .
There are several options for the grantor in the selection of a trustee for an irrevocable life insurance trust : mature and responsible members of the family , fiduciaries of the family and a bank trust officer . Some grantors have also given power of attorney on the personal finances as trustee as well .
As a Grantor Trust , the income is reported on the grantor 's individual income tax return , so the Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust does not usually need to file a tax return . If there is no income in the policy , you may need to write an initial note to the IRS stating that . If income is over $ 600/year , you may need to use Form 1041 to file a tax return for that year . Contact your tax consultant to get the final word on this .
The Grantor of an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is the person who creates the trust . He/she is usually the Insured person on the policy that is put under the ownership of the trust , and is usually also the Owner of the policy , thus transferring ownership to the irrevocable life insurance trust .
Life insurance is personal property . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is an artificial entity . It is sometimes in the best interest of planning for a life insurance policy to be owner by a third party or a trust . When an ILIT is set up and dated , the trust of the ILIT applies for the life insurance policy as policy owner . The grantor of the ILIT contributes premiums , generally through annual gifting or using the unified credit . When the death of the insured occurs the proceeds are distributed to the beneficiaries of the ILIT .
To avoid life insurance death benefits from inflating the taxable estate of the life insured , it would be necessary to ensure there are no incidents of ownership . There are a few ways this is normally done . One is to set up an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust to be owner and beneficiary of the life insurance . Money for premiums could be gifted by the grantor -LRB- also insured -RRB- to the trust . Another way would be for adult children to own and be beneciary of the policy on the insured -LRB- parent -RRB- .
An Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is created to own life insurance as an entity that will not be included in the estate of the grantor . The ILIT is created and applies for life insurance as the owner of the policy . The grantor gifts the premium into the trust with assigned beneficiaries who will be the recipients of the life insurance death benefit proceeds . Consult an attorney to see if an ILIT is suitable for your situation .
The Primary Purpose of an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is to own a life insurance policy and distribute the policies proceeds to the ILIT beneficiaries and thus outside estate . The ILIT is set up and dated first . Then the policy is dated after the trust date . The grantor generally gifts the premiums or uses the unified credit to fund the ILIT without taxes on the premiums . Consult with an estate tax attorney before moving forward with any estate planning thats considering an ILIT .
Charitable annuities are traditionally set up by a grantor who gifts a sum of money to a trust established with a charitable organization as the beneficiary . The trustee of the trust then purchases an annuity with the funds and pays the grantor a sum of money based on an amount specified when the gift and trust are established . The grantor receives a tax deduction for the gifted amount and can carry the deduction to future years of the entire deduction reduces income tax liability to zero . Upon the passing of the grantor , any remaining funds in the trust are then given to the charitable organization .
Private split dollar is a sharing arrangement of cash values and death benefit coverage between two parties with insurable interest . Generally speaking split dollar life insurance arrangements are popular between business owners and key executives as a retention benefit of employment . It can also be used between the grantor of an estate and an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust as financial leverage in paying federal and/or state estate taxes .
Assuming you are addressing irrevocable life insurance trusts -LRB- ILIT -RRB- , the chronology of events and ownership are very important . The grantor can not have any incident of ownership . The ILIT must be the owner and the date of the ILIT must precede the policy date . The ILIT will name the beneficiaries of the trust and premium paid by the ITLIT grantor must conform to annual gift tax or unified credit rules to avoid taxation of premiums . Consult your legal adviser before moving forward with any creation of ILIT .
With the unified credit exceeding 10 million dollars for married couples , most Americans may not need to create an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- to own a life insurance policy . But they may need an -LRB- ILIT -RRB- to avoid their state of residence estate tax because most states did not replicate the federal law . If your assets and your desired death benefit exceed federal or state limits an ILIT may be the way to go . Some grantors use their children as policy owners as a tactical planning option as well . But ownership has its privileges which includes the childs access to the policy or its draw backs by exacerbating the childs total estate . Before moving forward with any estate strategies , seek out legal advice .
Yes . There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that it offers , helps protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
There are two main life insurance trusts that people use - revocable and irrevocable life insurance trusts . People use life insurance trusts because there are tax advantages that they offer , they protect the proceeds , and helps you distribute the assets to your children at the least possible cost . An irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- is a legal document set up to distribute life insurance proceeds in a specific manner , depending on how the trust is designed . ILITs receive special tax consideration from the IRS that is not given to life insurance policies that would otherwise be owned by a natural person or revocable trust . Since the trust is irrevocable , the terms of the trust can not be changed -LRB- think of it like putting the contents in a vault and throwing away the key - it ca n't be opened til the insured dies -RRB- . An ILIT can offer many substantial advantages to protect life insurance proceeds . It can also help you distribute your property to your children at the least possible cost . If you have a taxable estate , you have a choice - pay the tax with your own money or pay only a fraction of the tax and use someone else 's money to pay the rest . If you want to use someone elses money to pay the tax , you can buy a life insurance policy . The type of life insurance policy will depend on the specific circumstances , but is usually a survivorship universal life policy if used for estate tax purposes . The life insurance policy may be secured for pennies on each dollar of tax that you owe . By putting the life insurance policy in an irrevocable trust , the proceeds become available to pay taxes due upon death . A life insurance policy that you purchase will require the same premium whether you put the policy in the trust or keep it outside of the trust . If you put the policy in the trust , the death benefit is not included in the calculation of the size of the estate . This is a huge tax savings , especially if the proceeds are several million dollars . If you keep the policy outside of the trust , the proceeds will be included in calculating the size of the estate potentially increasing the size of the estate by a big margin , and you may therefore have to pay much higher estate taxes before any of the property can be distributed to your children or other beneficiaries . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
To create an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- , start by meeting with your attorney to draft the trust . You yourself will not be able to make changes to it later so it is important to set it up correctly . It is also important that you set up an executor or trustee who you trust -LRB- the attorney who set it up is also often named trustee -RRB- . Then transfer Whole Life or Universal Life into the trust with the assistance of both your attorney and life insurance agent . Existing policies can be transferred with a change of policy owner form . New policies are set up with the irrevocable trust as owner . Once the Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust is active , you can visit with the trust executor about your ongoing wishes .
Ideally the grantor creates an irrevocable life insurance trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- for the benefit of their targeted beneficiaries . The ILIT must be dated before the life insurance policy date of issuance as well . The ILIT must own the life insurance policy day one . To comply with the law most ILITs use annual Crummy letter notification and sometimes may include hanging powers . Before moving forward with the ownership arrangement of an ILIT consult your legaladviser .
A Life Insurance Trust Fund is a trust that holds a life insurance policy or policies . The fund actually does not hold cash except what exists in the policy , and the only cash paid into it is to pay the premiums of the policy and cover any expenses the trust may incur . It is upon the death of the Grantor-Insured that the death benefit is paid to the trust and distributed according to the terms set forth in the trust .
end question
start question
critical-illness-insurance
How do I know what conditions are covered on a critical illness plan ?
Great question ! The basic illnesses will be covered by almost all plans , but there are differences from company to company . The conditions under which they are covered and amounts paid out can vary also . I would tell you to look at the policy carefully , and if you do n't have it handy , contact the agent or company that sold it to you . They can tell you exactly what is covered by your policy . If you are looking into purchasing one , please shop carefully , or find a trustworthy agent to guide you through the selection process , to find the best fit for your needs . If I can help any further , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help.Thanks for asking !
I am a huge fan of Critical Illness plans -LRB- CI -RRB- . So I 'm happy to add to the great comments above . What is covered is always defined ... . yet there are a few `` twists to look for '' . Most CI plans have moved to a `` multiple bucket '' philosophy . Most cover the `` Big Three '' critical illnesses : Cancer , Heart Attack , & Stroke . What you have to understand is if the policy is a `` One and Done '' or a `` Multiple Bucket '' plan . One and Done means that once the benefit is paid out for one CI , then the policy terminates . Diagnosed with cancer , you get the check , but there is no benefit for hart attack or stroke . A multiple bucket policy usually has a benefit for different categories -LRB- buckets of money -RRB- : Heart/Stroke , Cancer , Other . So you could be diagnosed with cancer & a benefit is paid . Then the stress gives you a heart attack & a benefit is paid . Then after all that , some `` other CI '' happens and you get a 3rd benefit . ALSO consider what the definitions are WHEN a benefit is paid . Consider an Organ Transplant benefit . Does it pay upon diagnosis and being added to the national registry or does it pay when the physical transplant is completed ? That 's a biiiiig timing difference . Also consider the `` Carcinoma in Situ '' definition and benefit amount . That 's when cancer is isolated to one tissue type -LRB- general definition -RRB- . Being smaller & localized , a Carcinoma in Situ is generally `` not as dangerous or life threatening '' . I believe all CI plans with a Carcinoma in Situ benefit pays only a percentage of the full benefit . So if you have a $ 10,000 cancer bucket , yet it 's Carcinoma in Situ , do you get 10 or 25 % of the full benefit ? Hmmmmm . OR ... does the CI plan your agent is offering even have an in Situ ??? Most have in Situ benefits . Just double check . If you trigger the in Situ benefit know that you still have the remaining percentage left in case the cancer spreads . Usually called invasive cancer . If you received $ 2500 out of your $ 10,000 when it was in Situ , you still have $ 7500 in your `` bucket '' in case things get worse . Look at the riders -LRB- additional benefits too -RRB- . Return of premium upon death -LRB- other than a named CI -RRB- or return of premium after a named period of time , Mortgage payment , accident benefits , hospital benefits , and children 's benefits are riders offered by various carriers . Weigh the cost vs. the benefit based on YOUR specific needs . PLEASE consider coverage for your children . I know that if one of my girls was living in a children 's hospital fighting cancer , I 'd also live there . The cash injection can be financially life saving . HOPE all this helped ... - gravy
The marketing brochure for the critical illness product you are looking into should clearly state which specific critical conditions are covered under the policy and any situations that might trigger a partial payment under the policy . For example , generally , critical illness policies will at least cover heart attacks , strokes , certain organ transplants and usually cancer . Depending upon the company and the policy it markets there may be other conditions it covers or there may be situations where certain conditions will trigger only a partial payment of the policy 's face amount . You should carefully study the marketing materials you are presented , ask for clarifications of how the policy will work in any circumstances you have any questions about and , if possible , you might want to do some comparison shopping . All critical illness policies are not created equal and there coverage , benefit amounts and costs can vary significantly from insurance carrier to insurance carrier .
In the U.S. , covered medical events in a critical illness plan are plainly listed in each policy . So if you have such a policy , read it carefully and do n't buy critical illness in the states until you have first read what it covers because the trigger points vary by company .
In Canada , the basic conditions cover by insurance companies are similar . Some companies offer enhanced coverage . If you own a critical illness policy then the conditions would be listed in the policy document . If you are trying to decide which policy to choose . I suggest you contact an independent insurance broker to help you decide . If you want to do some basic research on your own many companies have a list of the conditions they cover on their web sites . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Critical illness policies are very specific on the afflictions they cover . Every marketing brochure will list each illness and the percentage of claim to be paid for each illness . The six most common are usually covered by all policies and there are many different carriers that add various critical illnesses to the list . I have seen as many as fourteen . Be sure when comparing coverage that it covers as many as possible for the most affordable premiums . Critical illness is a very affordable way to protect yourself in case of a major potentially career ending illness . Especially , if you can not afford a good long term disability insurance plan .
Critical Illness insurance is a specified disease based coverage meant to provide a tax free , lump sum face amount up diagnosis of a covered illness.There are several insurance carriers who offer this coverage and as you can imagine , each carrier covers different conditions . That said , there are a select few States where the Department of Insurance has not approved Critical Illness insurance for sale within that specific State . Anyway , of all the conditions covered ... the most important are Heart Attack , Cancer and Stroke . Not to downplay the seriousness of other diagnosed conditions but nearly 80 % of all claims that will get paid from these policies are due to those three conditions . Each carrier offers coverage for other conditions . Some carriers offer coverage for 21 different conditions , while other carriers may limit their coverage to 4 or 5 conditions . Please understand that when looking into Critical Illness coverage , the most important thing to look for is not just what conditions are covered but how they are covered . The benefit definitions are a major consideration and it is `` critical '' -LRB- pardon the pun -RRB- to know the benefit definitions prior to purchase . There are carriers who provide a stroke benefit but will not pay a benefit unless the neurological deficit of the stroke persists for 30 days ... whereas there area few carriers who will pay a stroke benefit once the neurological deficit persists 96 hours . I hope this helped answer your question .
NOW ... hehehe . You ca n't get DI soon enough . Yet the question can be changed to , `` Will I qualify for DI & should I consider additional options ? '' Will you qualify >> Di underwriting is pretty messy . Where you work , how long you 've been there , what you DO , what you make , your health , your lifestyle , & much more will determine the carrier you should apply with , what benefit length & amount you 'll receive , & what `` health tier '' you 'll receive . Although there is a LOT to gather for a disability quote , an experience , independent agent should make it a smooth process . I Might just know one ! Additional Options >> > simply said , the reason for buying a DI plan is to replace lost income if you are not able to work . Yet allow me to point out a issues that stump the DI process : What if you do n't `` earn an income ? Such as a stay at home parent . Maybe you just entered the work force or started a completely different career & you have no `` income history '' . Lower income earners face the challenge that most DI plans only replace up to 60 % of their income while out on a claim . They 're already having a rough time making ends meet ... & now the income is down 40 % ??? OUCH . `` So Gravy . What can we do in addition to or instead of DI ? '' ... Great question . Thanks for asking :--RRB- DI is a great foundation for anyone who earns an income . Yet consider other protection plans in addition to , or instead of , a standalone DI Plan . > Critical Illness : Receive a single payment of $ 5,000 , $ 10,000 , $ 50,000 , or as much as $ 500,000 upon DIAGNOSIS of a specified disease or condition . Fantastic protection for everyone ... Yet in this post , Low/No income wage earners should definitely consider this . > Hybrid / Living Benefits Life insurance : There are various life products that have either rides or acceleration of benefits for Disability & / or Critical Illness . As an example , I have a client that is young , modest income , & decided that a single plan with life , disability , & critical illness benefits . She 's hedged her bets with a single policy that covers multiple areas . When to buy & what is the best disability plan ??? Your specific situation will determine that . When you speak to an agent , I hope ALL your options are discussed .
The marketing brochure for the critical illness product you are looking into should clearly state which specific critical conditions are covered under the policy and any situations that might trigger a partial payment under the policy . For example , generally , critical illness policies will at least cover heart attacks , strokes , certain organ transplants and usually cancer . Depending upon the company and the policy it markets there may be other conditions it covers or there may be situations where certain conditions will trigger only a partial payment of the policy 's face amount . You should carefully study the marketing materials you are presented , ask for clarifications of how the policy will work in any circumstances you have any questions about and , if possible , you might want to do some comparison shopping . All critical illness policies are not created equal and there coverage , benefit amounts and costs can vary significantly from insurance carrier to insurance carrier .
Critical illness is a specialized form of what used to be called `` dread disease '' coverage . More comprehensive than a simple cancer plan , critical illness policies normally pay a lump sum benefit on first diagnosis of listed medical conditions including heart attack , cancer , stroke and another 3 - 7 named conditions . Most carriers do not issue critical illness after age 65 or 70 . Buy a health insurance plan , not a life plan with a critical illness rider .
I recommend all my clients need a critical illness policy to protect themselves from the costs involved with the illness . What most fail to think about is what happens after the illness . A critical illness often leaves people unable to work or sometimes lose their job -LRB- and possibly the health insurance that went with it -RRB- . A cash critical illness plan of any benefit amount helps maintain the lifestyle you had prior to your illness by affording cash to pay the mortgage , cars , food , necessities and other unforeseen out of pocket costs associated with the illness . At the very least I advise clients to purchase a critical illness plan that matches their max out-of-pocket of their health plan so in the worst case scenario they will have no risk exposure .
If you have a health history of critical illness in your family , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If older relatives have critical illness the resulted in assisted living or nursing home confinement , you should consider securing critical illness insurance . If you have indications that you may be susceptible to a disease , you should consider critical illness insurance , while your health condition is reasonably good .
It 's 2016 . Let me add to this with an updated reply : We work with about 12 carriers that offer Critical Illness . There only tends to be two `` not covered areas '' with some policies . # 1 . Certain types of Skin cancer are not covered . Skin cancer means melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer . Understand if and at what level skin cancers are covered . Melanoma of the skin , the deadliest form of skin cancer , is the fifth most common type of new cancer diagnosis in American men and the seventh most common type in American women . SO make sure skin cancer is covered . # 2 Know the difference between Invasive Cancer & Carcinoma in Situ -LRB- Non-Invasive Cancer -RRB- . All policies pay a reduced amount for in Situ . Carcinoma in Situ is the earliest form of cancer which involves only the tissue where it is found and has not invaded the surrounding tissue or organs in the body . So when the cancer is smaller and localized , it 's not nearly as `` threatening '' . The benefit amount for in Situ is a percentage of the full amount . So if you bought a $ 10,000 critical illness policy , a typical plan pays 25 % of the benefit amount for in Situ . Or in this example , $ 2500 . The good news is that the other $ 7500 is still there for you to access should the cancer spread . KNOW the percentage that is paid out . I still believe some carriers only pay out at 10 % for in Situ ... I suggest a carrier that is at 25 % . So this is n't a `` not covered issue '' . Invasive vs. in Situ is just know at what level your benefit pays out . Something else ... we lean towards plans that trigger a benefit upon diagnosis , not treatment of , the critical illness . Consider the organ transplant coverage . You need the $ $ way before the actual transplant . It can take months before you are 1st in line for an organ . As with all my other posts , we let underwriting determine the best choice for someone and then the coverage for the premium paid . BYE THE BEST you can qualify for folks ... . Reach out and I can work on getting you a copy of `` Stop Wasting Your Money on Insurance '' . - gravy
Critical Care Insurancecould definitely help in the event of a life altering event . I have Life Insurance that has Critical Illness included free of charge . If I was going to buy Critical Illness I would do it with the death benefit . This wayyou have the death benefit and Critical Illness . Here is a good example that will help you out . I have a person who bought 500,000 in a death benefit . If he was diagnosed with Cancer or had a major Critical Illness event he does have the option of accessing up to 90 % of that benefit . It would definitely help him maintain his lifestyle while he is out of work .
Critical Illness Insurance and Life Insurance are two separate products . Critical Illness Insurance provides a benefit while the insured person is still alive but diagnosed with cancer , stroke , or other covered illness . Life Insurance pays a death benefit to the insured person 's beneficiary after having passed away from illness , accident , or any cause . Some Life Insurance policies do have Critical Illness benefits built in or added on as a rider . With these policies , you can access some of the face amount while still alive if diagnosed with a covered critical illness . If that benefit is never used , the entire face amount is paid out upon the death of the Insured .
Critical illness policy is like a cancer policy except it covers much more than just cancer . Most critical illness plans pay a lump sum cash benefit on first diagnosis of a named condition . Your critical illness policy may cover cancer , heart attack , stroke and up to a dozen or more conditions .
I think critical illness policies are the most underserved market in health insurance . When people consider supplemental insurance plans they normally only look at cancer plans . Most critical illness plans cover much more than cancer . They include heart attack , stroke and some cover disabling conditions like ALS . Look for a health insurance based critical illness plan , not one that is a rider to term life insurance .
Life insurance pays a lump sum to a beneficiary upon the death of the insured . A critical illness policy pays the insured upon the diagnosis of a critical illness . Although different in nature critical illness policies are often written on a life insurance chassis allowing the money to be paid out upon the diagnosis of a covered critical illness and if the insured dies from the critical illness it will pay the benefit , or some portion of , to an assigned beneficiary .
Critical illness policies are very specific on the afflictions they cover . Every marketing brochure will list each illness and the percentage of claim to be paid for each illness . The six most common are usually covered by all policies and there are many different carriers that add various critical illnesses to the list . I have seen as many as fourteen . Be sure when comparing coverage that it covers as many as possible for the most affordable premiums . Critical illness is a very affordable way to protect yourself in case of a major potentially career ending illness . Especially , if you can not afford a good long term disability insurance plan .
Critical illness insurance is like the popular cancer insurance plan except much more broad in scope . A critical illness plan will pay a benefit -LRB- usually on first diagnosis -RRB- for any one of the named conditions listed in your policy . Critical illness may have a dozen or more conditions including cancer , heart attack , stroke , etc. .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Will Health Insurance Pay For Implant Removal ?
It would depend on the reason for the removal . If your health is injeopardydue to the implant or complications of the implant then it may be covered . If however you just want it removed for cosmetic reasons then chances are it will not be . Check with your agent orinsurancecompany .
It would depend on the reason for the removal . If your health is injeopardydue to the implant or complications of the implant then it may be covered . If however you just want it removed for cosmetic reasons then chances are it will not be . Check with your agent orinsurancecompany .
Health insurance does not generally cover cosmetic surgery , so if the reason for the implant isjust breast enhancement then no it would not usually be covered . If the reason for the implant is reconstructive in nature due to a covered illness or accident then the implants may be covered .
Health insurance does not cover dental implants unless there is an accident and severe damage to teeth . Dental insurance may cover implants , however , dental insurance is limited to a fixed dollar amount each year . For example the most common dental insurance pays a maximum of $ 1,500 in benefits a year and only 50 % of major work . If the dental policy covers inplants it may pay 50 % of one or two in a year .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for Esteem hearing implant because it is a fully implantable inner ear hearing aid , and hearing aids are excluded . Medicare will cover prosthetic devices that replace the function of the middle ear , but does not address whether Esteem is considered this type of prosthetic device .
Generally , Medicare will not pay for teeth implants , just as Medicare does not cover fillings , crowns or dentures . Since Medicare will do reconstructive surgery on the jaw , it is possible that a tooth implant might be approved if it is proved to be a necessary part of that particular surgery .
Most general dentistry services are excluded by original Medicare , this would include implants . Dental implants may be done for cosmetic reasons or as a more permanent alternative to a bridge or partial plate . Ask your dentist if there are discounts for paying in cash any time you need extensive dental work .
Dental procedures are generally not covered by your health insurance plan . This includes veneer 's , crowns , caps , implants , fixed appliances , etc. . If your tooth has been damaged as a result of an accident you may have some dental benefits under your health insurance plan . Same is true if you had oral surgery to treat a condition such as cancer . In that case restorative procedures would usually be covered by your health insurance plan .
Medicare does not normally pay for glasses . However , after cataract surgery where an intraocular lens has been implanted , Medicare Part B will pay for one set of standard glasses through a supplier enrolled in Medicare . In other situations , Medicare Part B unfortunately does not cover the cost of eyeglasses or contact lenses .
Medicare does not cover periodic eye exams for vision testing and does not cover eyeglasses , in most cases . Medicare will pay for one pair of eyeglasses following cataract surgery in which an introcular lens was implanted . Medicare will also pay for treatment or surgery by a medical doctor for eye disease .
Medicare and most Advantage plans will cover cataract surgery . Medicare not only covers the cost of surgery but also will pay for the cost of a lens implant . The Crystalens is a `` premium '' lens and you may be required to pay an additional fee over and above the Medicare allowance . Your doctor can advise you on your responsibility .
Medicare Part B does not cover routine vision exams and eyeglasses . However ... Prescription eyeglasses with standard frames -LRB- or one set of contact lenses -RRB- is covered by Medicare after cataract surgery that implants an intraocular lens . In addition to the above requirement , Medicare will only pay for contact lenses or eye glasses if you purchase from a supplier who is enrolled in Medicare . You are responsible for paying 20 % of the Medicare - approved amount , and the Part B deductible also applies . If you have Medicare Supplement insurance , the Part B deductible and co-insurance may be covered .
Certainly President Obama has never publicly made any statement that would indicate a plan to take away Medicare and to do so would be an act of political suicide . Whatever position you may take on our president 's actions , results or intentions , he has demonstrated some pretty keen political survival skills . The more appropriate question would be `` Are the President 's health care policies going to have a negative or positive effect on Medicare ? '' An examination of the Affordable Care Act and its funding mechanisms shed more light on this subject . To help pay for the expansion of health care for those under age 65 and to provide the premium subsidies for persons earning less than 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level you will find that approximately $ 700 billion dollars in what would have been increased spending on Medicare are being diverted to ObamaCare over the next decade . We will still be spending more on Medicare 10 years from now than today but at reduced levels and at precisely the time when more Americans than ever will be moving into Medicare as the Baby Boom generation fully enters its Medicare years . The net consequence of this would seem to be negative to the Medicare population . Projected reimbursement levels to health care providers for serving Medicare patients -LRB- already thought to be below or at the cost of providing these services by many health care providers -RRB- are expected to steadily decline in the coming years and I have seen reports indicating that they will fall below reimbursement levels for Medicaid patients . The number of physicians accepting new Medicare patients is already a national problem and if reimbursement level decline as predicted this will only make the access problem worse for senior citizens . And , yes , a national review board is supposed to provide `` guidance '' on appropriate treatments for seniors though the composition of this body and any recommendations they will be making are unclear at this time . This is the so called `` Death Panel '' some have referred to . This term may be overstated but as described in the health care reform law it will have great latitude in its decision making and little outside oversight . So , I will conclude by saying that the reasonably expected impact of the health care reform law on the Medicare population does not bode well and will make it even harder for the program to live up to the expectations of the persons who will be covered by it . Remember , while campaigning , then Senator Obama , when asked by a person if his program would pay for a pacemaker to be implanted in her 100 + year old mother who was still active , had a will to live and wanted to enjoy a good quality of life , said in response that `` will to live '' was a subjective measure that would be impossible to administer and that perhaps the best response would be for her mother to just take a pain pill . Though to be fair , he did n't say whether she should just take a pain pill as needed or to take a handful and wash them down with some Jack Daniels .
Cataract surgery is one of the most common surgical procedures covered by Medicare . Most of the cataract claims are submitted during the first 18 months once becoming Medicare eligible . Medicare Part B will pay for standard surgery and a replacement lens implant if the claim is considered medically necessary . Your doctor can advise you about your out of pocket share .
Yes , Medicare does cover cataract surgery under Medicare Part B when determined medically necessary . Medicare will only pay for the cataracts , not any other medical conditions that might have contributed to their development . Medicare will also cover the intraocular lens implants and one pair of glasses for use after the surgery .
Medicare does not pay for Viagra , Cialis , Levitra or other erectile dysfunction drugs . They are not covered in Part B Medicare and excluded by Part D Medicare Drug Plans . The coverage ended in 2006 , when Congress determined them `` lifestyle '' drugs instead of medically necessary drugs . Since then , penile vacuum pumps , or , if those are ineffective , implanted penile inflation devices , are the only treatments for erectile dysfunction that are covered by Medicare .
Breast implants are not covered by Medicare if done for cosmetic purposes . However , Medicare will cover breast prostheses following a mastectomy under Medicare Part A -LRB- if done on an inpatient basis -RRB- or Medicare Part B -LRB- if done on an outpatient basis -RRB- . The post-surgery brassiere is also covered by Medicare .
As long as the physician writing your prescribing deems your need to be medically necessary , most insurance companies will cover this medication . Several other erectile dysfunction drugs are also covered by most plans , as are vacuum devices and implants , as long as they are medically necessary , something that would normally be the result of a disease or side effect of surgery .
This is a great question . This will depend on specific situations . Most major medical plans will not cover implants if it is for cosmetic purposes . However , they may possibly be covered if there is some medical reason . This will depend on your specific case , the best thing to do is contact your insurance company and they should be able to tell you .
Cosmetic breast implants are not a covered expense under Medicare . Breast reconstructive surgery following a mastectomy is a covered expense under Medicare Part A and subject to the 2013 deductible of $ 1184 . Follow up treatment after discharge would be covered under Medicare Part B . You will need to satisfy your Part B deductible of $ 147 for 2013 .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover Stepchildren ?
You can have your stepchildren under your health insurance plan in addition to your biological children and persons you are a legal guardian of . Please note , some plans may state that there has to be a legal relationship between stepparent and stepchild , meaning the stepparent has to be married to the child 's biological parent.It 's important to verify with the carrier whether that is a requirement if the stepparent is not married to the child 's biological parent . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , you can have two or more policies , as long as you qualify financially for the total amount of coverage . Some mixed families take out two policies , rather than have their biological children and stepchildren have to split the same policy proceeds . Or , they take two policies so their divorced spouse has a different policy than their current spouse . Those who own business policies may need to keep them separate from personal policies for tax reasons . Sometimes having two policies is better than one , because the death benefit will be covering two completely different types of needs . E.g. . You might want a small policy to cover your funeral expenses , which would necessitate some type of permanent insurance . But you might also want a larger policy to pay off your mortgage , and 10 year Term -LRB- which usually costs much less than Whole or Universal Life -RRB- may be a much more economical choice for that particular need .
You can have your stepchildren under your health insurance plan in addition to your biological children and persons you are a legal guardian of . Please note , some plans may state that there has to be a legal relationship between stepparent and stepchild , meaning the stepparent has to be married to the child 's biological parent.It 's important to verify with the carrier whether that is a requirement if the stepparent is not married to the child 's biological parent . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Health insurance rates increase because the underlying cost of health care services increases every year and our population 's average consumption of health care services has been increasing for many years . If the cost of gasoline steadily rises and at the same time you are driving more miles each year then you understand it costs you more to operate your car . Health care services are the gasoline and using more health care per person is the increased miles driven part of the analogy above . That addresses the basic economic factors that have been happening for decades . Now add to those the impacts of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and you have a whole new set of cost drivers being added to the equation . For example , ObamaCare does add taxes and fees to insurance plan costs and medical devices - these costs are passed on to the consumer . The law mandates that a wide range of preventive health care services must be covered at 100 % , all policies must cover maternity -LRB- many individual policies did n't -RRB- , no medical underwriting is allowed , polices must be guaranteed to be issued and pre-existing conditions must be covered immediately , and these are just some highpoints of the coverage changes now required . While all of these requirements may sound good , and they do benefit many people , there is no way around the fact that such changes will increase health care consumption even further . More demand for a finite resource equals higher costs . An aging American population is also a driver of increased health care consumption and , with the Baby Boom generation entering their retirement years , will be for years to come . This gives you a generaloutline of why your health insurance rates have been increasing and will continue to be increasing for the foreseeable future . As I described above , our nation has many structural issues that drive health insurance rates higher . Despite its name , the Affordable Care Act serves mainly to expand access to health insurance and health care but does very little to address any of the underlying factors that lead to higher health insurance rates .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
The following is a small part of the coverages typically provided by renters insurance policy : 1 . Fire or Lightning . 2 . Windstorm or Hail : This does not cover loss : a. caused directly or indirectly by frost , cold weather , ice other than hail , snow or sleet , all whether wind driven or not ; b. to the interior of a dwelling or other structure , or to the property inside , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water ; This exclusion 2 . b. does not apply if the building covered , or containing the property covered , first sustains an actual damage to its roof or walls by the direct force of wind or hail . Then we pay for loss to the exterior or interior of the building , including the property in it , which is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enters the building through openings in the roof or walls made by the direct action of wind or hail . c. to watercraft except rowboats and canoes on the insured premises including their trailers , accessories , equipment and outboard motors unless such property is inside a fully enclosed building . 3 . Explosion . 4 . Riot or Civil Commotion . 5 . Aircraft : This includes self-propelled missiles or spacecraft and the objects falling from them . 6 . Vehicles : This includes only direct loss from actual physical contact of a vehicle with covered property . But , we do not pay under this peril for loss or damage to fences , driveways and walks . 7 . Sudden and Accidental Damage from Smoke : This does not cover loss caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . 8 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief : This does not cover loss if the insured premises are vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . This does not cover loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured or tenant . *** Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Medigap is a supplemental health insurance policy that can be purchased to go along with Medicare Part A and Part B . It is used to cover the costs that Medicare does not cover . Medigap does not fit in with Medicaid as Medicaid covers all medical costs and does not have the `` gaps '' of coverage that Medicare does .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not includeHPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not include HPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Which Is More Expensive Car Or Motorcycle Insurance ?
Car insurance is usually more expensive than motorcycle insurance because the value of the vehicle is more . Also , there is likely to be more damage in an auto accident compared to a motorcycle accident . However , there are some very expensive motorcycles on the road that do cost more to insure than many cars . Of course , these cycles are very expensive bikes .
Car insurance is usually more expensive than motorcycle insurance because the value of the vehicle is more . Also , there is likely to be more damage in an auto accident compared to a motorcycle accident . However , there are some very expensive motorcycles on the road that do cost more to insure than many cars . Of course , these cycles are very expensive bikes .
Most auto insurance companies/vehicle insurance companiesoffer a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount : typically , a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount is when you have 2 or more vehicles -LRB- cars , trucks , SUVs , motorcycles ... -RRB- on the same type ofpolicy . Insurance companies usually do n't allow the multi-car/multi-vehicle discount for different types of motorized vehicles on different policies . For example - if you have a car on one policy and a motorcycle on a different policy -LRB- but both policies are with the same insurance company -RRB- then usually you would not get a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount . You would get the multi-car discountif you have 2 cars insured on the same auto insurance policy . Also , most companies that insure motorcycles will give a multi-unit discount if you insure 2 or more motorcycles on the same motorcycle insurance policy . The key point with the multi-car/multi-vehicle discount is that you are usually required to have 2 or more vehicles covered on the same policy . It is always best to review with your professional independent insurance broker to find the coverage options , as well as ways to secureall availablediscounts -LRB- so you wo n't end up paying more than you have to for your insurance -RRB- .
Riding a motorcycle does not affect your life insurance rates . Only a bad driving record -LRB- or riding record in the case of motorcycles . -RRB- if you race motorcycles it can affect your rates or even acceptance with many companies . Thank you for asking about riding a motorcycle and not driving a motorcycle . It makes me cringe when people say `` I DRIVE a motorcycle . ''
No , riding a motorcycle will not affect life insurance rates unless you race motorcycles . Your life insurance application will not ask whether you own or ride a motorcycle . If you do participate in motorcycle races , you will need to fill out a form that asks how many races per year , how fast you go , etc. . The rate may or may not be impacted by that information .
A stolen motorcycle is not covered under a renters or tenants policy . All coverage for a motorcycle is contained in a motorcycle policy . A renters or Tenants policy covers the personal property which specifically excludes motor vehicles . The only exception would be a motorized vehicle that is used to maintain the property and is not licensed for road use .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
Sure it can . There are many factors that determine the final price of a car insurance policy . Certainly your driving record and history are important factors and , with many companies , so is your credit score . But there are other discounts that may be available depending on the company . Most companies offer discounts ofor insuring more than one car . In some cases , that discount gets deeper the more cars you insure . Liklewise , companies discount their car insurance if you also insure your home . Otheres apply an additional discount if you also insure your motorcycle , Boat or RV and others include a discount if you also have Life Insurance . Ask your insurance professional and you may be pleasantly surprised .
I am going to answer your question by giving you a true life story that I experienced with one of my elderly clients that hopefully helps you to see the `` complexity of life '' issues we all have to face . I have an elderly lady that has been a client for years , We have grown old together . She has saved money and has continued to work every day in spite of my objections . Her brother was in a nursing home and she went to see her brother without fail at least twice a week . The path she had to travel included one of these `` turn lanes '' that clears the traffic to turn left while the other lanes supposedly had the red light . One day she was making that left turn and a motorcycle hits her right hand side whell panel as she is turning . The motorcycle flies over her car and the driver is killed . The investigating officer ticketed my client for `` failing toyield right of way '' . Please remember my client has money . What if that `` family '' of that deceiased motorcycle driver sues my client for `` wrongful death '' ? I knw we all look for ways to save money but how often are `` penny wise and pound foolish ? '' .
No , owning a motorcycle does not affect life insurance . The only time motorcycle riding affects policy rates is if the motorcycle is used in racing or stunts . Then the policy can be rated up with table ratings , have a flat extra added to it , or possibly the application can be denied coverage .
Your homeowners policy covers your personal property . In the policy definitions you will likely find that that does not include motorized vehicles of any type . There might be an exception for a vehicle used to maintain the premises -LRB- i.e. riding lawn mower . -RRB- Your motorcycle might be covered by a motorcycle policy . Coverage for loss by theft is frequently an option on motorcycle policies .
Your health insurance policy will cover a motorcycle accident , if it is a qualified Marketplace plan in your state . Typically , ER and other major medical expenses are part of the benefit package . A deductible and/or coinsurance may apply , depending on which tier of plans you chose . Physical damage to the motorcycle -LRB- collision and comprehensive -RRB- would only be provided on a separate policy . A federal subsidy may have been available to help you pay for coverage . Open Enrollment allows you to change plans and compare all available options . Answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier Health Insurance Broker since 1980 and owner of several top-rated consumer websites that offer the lowest available rates .
In most states automobile insurance follows a vehicle . This is the policy that will apply if you borrow the vehicle and are involved in an accident . The owner of the vehicle can allow any licensed driver to operate the vehicle . Under those circumstances the coverage on the vehicle remains in force . If the vehicle is stolen there is not any coverage . The rate charged for the automobile insurance depends , in part , on the drivers who reside where the vehicle is registered . These drivers are considered the household of the vehicle . Their claims history and motor vehicle report will be scrutinized by the insurance companys underwriters . If a driver in the household is considered to be an unsuitable risk , the insurance company may offer coverage for the car only if the unsuitable driver is excluded from the policy . Under these circumstances the owner of the vehicle has relinquished the right for that excluded driver to operate the vehicle . That driver can not borrow the car without loss of all coverage . The vehicle is insured to the limits stated in the policy . Automobile insurers provide a range of insurance limits . This fact , alone , should alert vehicle owners to the fact that sometimes a claim can exceed the limits of the policy . A recent example is a car was struck by another driver who then caromed into a third car which rolled forward and struck another car , which then rolled forward and ran over a motorcycle operator . Two people left the scene by emergency vehicles . The chances are quite good that this accident will exhaust the limits of most insurance policies . The responsible operator is liable for damages beyond the limits of the policy . If you are the casual driver of a car owned by someone else you need to understand that the coverage available is set out in the insurance policy for the automobile you are borrowing . If you are involved in an accident and the damages exceed the limit of the policy for the automobile concerned , your own insurance policy on your own automobile may provide coverage in excess of the coverage from the damaged vehicles insurance . This combination of coverages means that there is probably more coverage when you , the occasional operator , are driving then otherwise . This doesnt relieve the occasional operator from any responsibility . It would be wise to make sure that there is adequate insurance on the vehicle you are borrowing . Sometimes there is an expectation that the occasional operator is providing insurance . Worse would be the situation where you damaged the vehicle and there wasnt any physical damage coverage and the owner expects you to repair the vehicle . This could be the case if the deductible was out of reach for you . It is probably wise to discuss this with the owner of the vehicle before you borrow the car . This would be particularly true if you planned to borrow the car often or even periodically . Relationships can be damaged severely by an automobile accident . These expectations can work both ways and the occasional operator can expect that certain coverages are in place , such as medical payments , that may not be on the policy .
This would be the most general answer possible but over all motorcycle is less then auto . But there are many many factors that can cause rates to go either way as it pertains to usage and vehicle itself . Simple example is on the motorcycle policy you are insuring a 2012 25k in value Harley and the auto policy a 2000 Toyota Corolla . Driving experience and how the vehicles are used are determining factors . Really this is more comparing an apple to an orange .
The majority of life insurance denials are a result of something found in the paramedical exam from the applicant ` sblood orurine testor medical history that is outside the life insurance company 's standards . These `` standards '' can vary a bit from one company to the next . The insurance company is all about `` risk '' and if they see something they believe is significant , they may deny coverage . Another option they have is to `` rate '' the individual below what they call `` standard '' and that move by them would make the cost of insurance more expensive for the applicant because the insurance company sees that individual as a higher risk . There areother reasons as well which include driving record -LRB- 2 DUI 's can be trouble here -RRB- , repeated risky activities such as travel to what they consider dangerous destinations in the world , non-sanctioned vehicle racing -LRB- cars , motorcycles , etc -RRB- and others . One of the best ways to help avoid a denial of life insurance coverage is to work with a knowledgeable life insurance agent who , based on your complete medical history disclosed in advance of the application , will help determine which life insurance company could be the most forgiving for your particular situation . The underwriting process for life insurance can be appealed and if you are working with a knowledgeable agent , they may be able to help get the denial reversed .
There may be any number of reasons but perhaps key reasons have to do with the size and valuse of a bike vs a car and seasonal use considerations . Let 's talk about size . A motorcycle can certainly be substantial , but it is in general much lighter and has less mass when compared to a car . As a result , the relative damage that is could do to another vehicle may be less , which can therefore effect the liability pricing . As for physical damage -LRB- comp and collision -RRB- here too , in a great many cases , a car may carry a higher value than a bike , thus effecting the comp and collision picing . Finally , there is the seasonal aspect . Here in CT for example , we can not ride 365 days out of the year like you lucky riders in warmer states can . Thus , because our bikes are on the road less , insurance companies may charge less because of the decreased exposure .
There are a couple of things that can positively affect the pricing of a car insurance policy . All companies take your driving history into consideration , and many also include credit history as well as an underwriting factor . So , if you are a careful driver and pay your bills on time , in most cases this will help save you money on your car insurance . In addition , many companies offer discounts if you insure more than one thing with them . These `` bundling '' plans can not only save you money , but will also save you time in that instead of having to make one call about your car , one about your home and a third abouit your life insurance and another about your motorcycle or boat , One agent can help you .
Insurance companies , for the most part insure your vehicle to it 's `` Actual Cash Value '' -LRB- AVC -RRB- . That is the starting point . Naturally , the newer the vehicle , the more likely that it will have a higher ACV . Some insurance providers are now offering coverage that will actually replace your car at full value should it be severly damaged in an accident so long as the car was aquired new within three years of the loss . Others extend that coverage to offer an amount necessary to buy a similar year make and model at current market value if damaged within 5 - to -7 years of purchase . Specialty providers for classic or antique cars , boats and motorcycles will insure the vehcle to it 's appraised value at the start so in many cases , you will need to obtain an appraisal when you purchase , much the same as when you buy a diamond engagement ring , for example .
Great Question . Usally health insurance cover you if you get hurt in a motorcycle accident . If you fall off your motorcycle and need medical attention you can go to your local hospital or urgent care and get service done . You also need to check with your health insurance company to see what is the limits and exclusion on the policy .
Most renters policies do not cover motorized vehicles , unless they are used to service the insured premises . That exception is highly limited and does not cover vehicles that are licensed or designed for use on public roads . Coverage for the theft of a motorcycle is contained in a motorcycle policy .
end question
start question
annuities
How Many Different Types Of Annuities Are There ?
Types you will hear reference to are : Fixed , Variable , Equity Indexed , Immediate , Deferred , Single Premium , Flexible Premium , with withdrawal penalties , and without withdrawal penalties . Fixed annuities provide guaranteed , fixed payments for the life of the contract . Variable annuities are tied to the market with minimal guarantees but potential for more growth . Immediate annuities are payed with a single premium . Deferred annuities have an accumulation phase in which premiums are paid in periodically .
The two main types of annuities are immediate and deferred : The policy earning crediting methods are diverse with some annuities using interest rates for fixed annuities , indices for indexed annuities and separate sub accounts in variable annuities . Annuities can be qualified by using them in an ERSIA retirement plan or non qualified .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
In Canada annuities there are two main types of annuities : accumulation annuities and payout annuities . If they are issued by an insurance company they can/do include maturity & death benefit guarantees , potential creditor proofing , estate bypass -LRB- privacy and costs -RRB- and more . They are used extensively by retirement and estate planners . The topic of annuities with all our industry jargon is indeed confusing . Experience has taught me that an understanding the basics is the key step . 1 . An accumulation annuity is as the name suggests is used to save money , a payout annuity option is included as part of the contract . There are two main types of accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- - principle is guaranteed and interest is earned similar to a GIC Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIF -RRB- - similar to a mutual fund , the principle is at risk , however , with maturity and death benefit guarantees , etc. . In Canada , they are also referred to a segregated funds or variable annuities . 2 . Payout Annuities , you exchange a sum of money for a flow of income . There are many variations with different guarantees but the basic two types are : Annuity certain , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for a specified number of years . Life annuity , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for the rest of your life or with a joint life . These are usually purchased with a guarantee payment period . The more guarantees , the lower the income . To understand an annuity , first understand a mortgage . With a mortgage you receive a lump sum of money and pay back principal and interest over a specified term until the balance is zero . With a payout annuity certain you are at the opposite side of the equation , you exchange a lump sum of money for a guaranteed income stream for a specified term . You will find 16 `` I want to ... How do I '' , that illustrates some strategies using annuities on www.jpw.ca Annuity strategies can be complicated . It is your money and you would be prudent work a life insurance broker with a professional designation like a CLU -LRB- Chartered Life Underwriter -RRB- or a CFP -LRB- Certified Financial Planner -RRB- . If you have further questions please contact me . Paul
When you say retirement annuity , I guess you are referring to an annuity that pays an income monthly ? With that being said , the annuity that you are referring to is called an immediate annuity . Immediate annuities come in many variations of length of income streams . Typically an annuity to fund retirement would be a life only with survivor benefits . Basically this annuity will pay a monthly income for as long as a Annuitant is alive and then either 100 % or as low as 50 % to a survivor , normally a spouse for the rest of their life . There are many different types of annuities however . One annuity in particular is an Indexed annuity with an income rider . This would be an alternative to the immediate annuity .
There is no one best life insurance for everyone . Different products are created for different needs , and different companies design products for different types of clients . Even different financial professionals have different impressions about what type of life insurance to get , based on how they see it plugging into your overall portfolio . It sounds confusing , but when you have a conversation with a life insurance agent who is watching out for your best interests , what you need becomes clear . Sometimes your best policy is determined by the limited choices you may have due to your age or health . Sometimes your budget steers you to your best life insurance . This may sound like a vague answer , but that is only because life insurance is designed for different niches . Until I know your need , I can not know how to answer correctly . But once I do know that , you may find choices and prices you never thought possible .
That is a great question ! There are a lot ! Simply put , there are two categories of annuities . One you plunk down your cash , and it immediately begins paying out your monthly payments , These are called `` immediate annuities '' . The other type takes your cash , and holds it , or `` defers '' the payments for a number of years before paying those monthly payouts . These are called `` deferred annuities '' . There are several different types of these , but again very simply , there are `` fixed annuities '' , that pay a set interest rate , there are `` indexed annuities '' , that pay interest rates that are based on the movements of a market , like the S&P 500 , or the Dow Jones . There are also `` variable annuities '' , that pay according to how well the investments within the annuity did -LRB- or did n't -RRB- do . That is a basic look at the types of annuities , I hope that helped . Please feel free to drop me a line if you 'd like more details , ok ? Thanks for asking !
The different kinds of annuities have not just one , but a variety of features that make them different . Here are some of them . Keep in mind that each annuity will have a combination of these differing features . 1 -RRB- Immediate vs Deferred . Immediate annuities are often single premium annuities and they begin making payments to the beneficiary almost immediately . Deferred annuities are often paid periodically , although they can also be paid in a single premium . Deferred annuities are not annuitized until after an extended accumulation period . 2 -RRB- Single Premium or Multiple Premium . 3 -RRB- Fixed , Indexed , or Variable . Fixed annuities have a guaranteed minimum interest rate that is paid on the premium paid for the annuity . Indexed annuities have a base interest rate but can perform above that through the use of market indexes . Variable annuities are invested in the stock or other markets and may or may not have guarantees .
Since your question was `` How does life insurance DIFFER from other types of insurance '' I 'll focus on that rather than how it 's similar to other types of insurance . Of course there 's different types of life insurance , so the differences will not always be the same . Health , car and sometimes liability insurances usually have a deductible or a co-pay - life insurance does not . in the case of permanent life insurances it will grow a cash value that may be accessed by the owner , and this cash value growth is tax-free . No other insurance has this feature . With whole life insurance you may stop paying premiums at some point and still continue to have the insurance ! No other insurance offers that either as far as I know . I 'm sure there are other differences but would need to compare to specific insurance products to see what they are . Interesting question ! Hope this helps !
You can purchase an Annuity from a few different sources . However the best way is to use an independent insurance agent who specializes in annuities . An independent agent can shop the market and all the different companies/products to give you the best annuity for your situation . You can also get annuities from captive insurance agents who work only for one company . They are limited -LRB- or highly encouraged -RRB- to just sell annuities from that one company . And since annuity rates are constantly changing and no one company has the best rates for all types of products , some consumers see this as a disadvantage . Some banks provide annuities , however their selection is often limited . Financial Advisors sometimes sell annuities as well as some stock brokers ; however , they usual stick to mainly variable annuities that are directly invested in the stock market . You can find an independent annuity expert online via a web search for them in your area . Or at various websites such as WEBSITELINK
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
How much should you invest in annuities ? The answer is an individual one based on your concerns about RISK and RETURN . There is n't a formula or set amount that people should follow . Annuities and equities and other places to park money should be divided up based on your risk profile as different investment choices carry different levels of risk . Risk simply means at what point do you stop putting money in places where the return can be zero or your money could be lost ? Everybody is different , annuities for the most part tend to be low risk products . Should you have money there ? I think so , I would , but my understanding of risk and how it effects things may be different than yours .
There are many factors that go into determine what an annuity will payout per month . The primary factor is the type of annuity you have . Additionally , there are usually options associated with the payout of an annuity , so answering your question without more information is not possible . If you are considering an annuity payment , be sure to compare all of your options . Here are some general factors that go into determining annuity payments -LRB- not all apply to each type of annuity and payout option -RRB- : The amount put into the annuity The growth of the annuity over time The age of the person -LRB- s -RRB- at the time annuity payments begin The age of the spouse if a joint payout applies The length of time the payments are guaranteed to last
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
This is really dependent upon the company through which you 're insured . Not all companies use the same scale when it comes to insurance scored . There are many different ways to use financial data to compile an insurance score , and each company gets to choose how it 's calculated . The funny thing is that they probably ca n't tell you how it 's calculated because they probably do n't know . They 'll pay an outside vendor whose business is to compile this data into a score , and there are many different models by which they do this . I 've seen scores as high as 900 and as low as 400 . However , this does n't really mean anything until you can determine what your score means to your premium . Every company applies credits to a different degree . For some , 600 may be a big discount . For others , 600 is considered rather low . it all depends on your company and how they apply credits . In general , your insurance score will follow your credit score , the higher , the better . To find out how that applies to you , talk to an agent you can trust and they 'll explain how it works for your company .
There are many different types of life insurance policies , and each life insurance company offers the type of coverage that best fits their goals , operations , finances , and customers . E.g. North American Company for Life and Health offers many competitive annuities and IUL products , whereas Fidelity Life specializes in No Exam policies . Some have a medical staff that makes them more suited for persons with serious health conditions , whereas others reject most health conditions and optimize their coverage for those with preferred health . That is why it is helpful to use an agency where you can shop from many different companies , or better yet , let that agency do it for you . After all the years it has taken me to learn what is best for different situations , I do n't see how anyone can do it on their own . However , websites and online quote engines can give you a start so that you can go into the shopping experience with some ideas of what you might need and want .
Annuities are bought by many types of people . Mainly people who are saving for retirement . The majority of annuity owners are 50 or over . it is a retirement savings product that traditionally has lent itself to near-retirees . The closer you get to retirement age , the more conservative your retirement savings should become . This is to help eliminate volatility , which can be very harmful to retirement income . But some types of Annuities can be suitable for younger people too . Variable Annuities offer direct market investments which can be attractive to younger buyers . And Indexed Annuities offer index-linked interest gains , which can act as an in-between to a traditional Fixed Annuity or CD , and a Variable Annuity or other market investment . Many Indexed Annuities offer a Guaranteed Lifetime Income Rider . This rider is now available to people as young as 40 , and a few companies even offer it to any age . This Rider can be an excellent guaranteed source of income for a younger consumer , and supplements other retirement savings very well .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Is Metlife Long Term Care Insurance ?
MetLife Long Term Care Insurance would be a policy that was sold by MetLife prior to 2010 . Since then , MetLife no longer offers the purchase of new long term care insurance policies through their company . The `` old '' MetLife long term care insurance could be a group policy or an individual long term care policy .
MetLife Long Term Care Insurance would be a policy that was sold by MetLife prior to 2010 . Since then , MetLife no longer offers the purchase of new long term care insurance policies through their company . The `` old '' MetLife long term care insurance could be a group policy or an individual long term care policy .
Unfortunately , MetLife discontinued offering Long Term Care Insurance in 2010 . Since then , they continue to service the individual and group long term care policies that they had sold previously , but have not yet started offering a new long term care insurance product . MetLife continues to offer a large line of other insurance products .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
MetLife discontinued selling both group and individual Long Term Care Insurance in 2010 . They still service existing LTC policies that their customers had purchased from MetLife but do not sell new policies . To receive a Long Term Care quote , contact any number of websites or agencies selling it . If you contact a website that sells life insurance , they may also be able to provide a LTCI quote .
The Federal Long Term Care Insurance Program -LRB- FLTCIP -RRB- provides long term care insurance for enrollees who are federal employees , USPS employees and active and retired members of the uniformed services and their qualified relatives . It is sponsored by the US Office of Personnel Management -LRB- OPM -RRB- and was introduced in 2002 by Long Term Care Partners LLC , a joint venture of MetLife and John Hancock . Since 2009 , John Hancock is the sole sponsor of Long Term Care Partners . The FLTCIP was specially designed to meet the needs of the federal family . The features and benefits are monitored by OPM and is on its second version . Qualified applicants are underwritten in a manner similar to LTC insurance sold to individuals by John Hancock and others . Go to the website for the program to find extensive information .
MetLife is rated A + by AM Best , which is the second highest rating offered by AM Best . MetLife has the most life insurance policy in force in North America . To get a quote for MetLife life insurance , you can go to a quote engine that offers that product , and compare MetLife 's rates to other insurance companies that are rated A + .
Some companies that offer Long Term Care insurance are Genworth Financial , John Hancock , and Mutual of Omaha , but there are many others . Due to lower interest rates and other factors , prices are on the rise , underwriting requirements are getting stricter , and some companies have quit offering Long Term Care -LRB- e.g. MetLife and Prudential -RRB- . I know I put it off way too long ; I hope you act now to lock in an affordable rate .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
MetLife quit selling new individual long term care life insurance policies at the end of 2010 . The company quit taking new enrollments to existing group multi-life long term care insurance plans in 2011 . Those individuals and groups who already had long term care policies with MetLife before this time had no changes to their coverage .
MetLife quit selling new individual and group Long Term Care Insurance policies in late 2010 . They announced that they would still service the Long Term Care policies that they had issued in the past . MetLife continues to pay claims on their existing Long Term Care business and writes new Life Insurance policies .
MetLife offers a variety of life insurance products in both individual and group policies . Therefore , each policy will work according to the type of life insurance it is . Their term insurance is guaranteed not to go up for the entire term . Their universal life guarantees depend on what type of policy it is . You can contact an agent that carries MetLife polices -LRB- including me -RRB- to find out about a particular product .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
To cancel MetLife life insurance , you can call MetLife customer service at1-800-638-5000 or use their online services at WEBSITELINK . It is a good idea to discuss the policy you are cancelling so that you know what will be lost , and what options there might be to keep it in a way that you can afford it , if you wish .
No , Metlife does not offer health insurance . The Metlife.com website does have a helpful page explaining what health insurance is , and tips on how to pick a good health insurance plan . The main insurance plans that Metlife offers are life insurance , disability insurance , home insurance , and auto insurance .
The Met is the largest insurance company by total assets . Here are the companies that comprise the Met . American Life Insurance Company , MetLife Alico Life Insurance KK -LRB- MetLife Alico Japan -RRB- , First MetLife Investors Insurance Company , General American Life Insurance Company , MetLife Insurance Company of Connecticut , MetLife Investors Insurance Company , MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company , Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and the New England Life Insurance Company . Met has been in business for 140 years .
The largest life insurance company in the United States -LRB- by assets -RRB- is presently the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company -LRB- aka MetLife -RRB- . MetLife is not the world 's largest life Insurer . The largest life insurer in the world -LRB- again by assets -RRB- is the Japan Post Insurance Company .
I was not able to find a General Life Insurance Company . I did find General American Life Insurance which has been bought by Metlife Insurance . Metlife is a good strong company to work with . I would however recommend comparing rates for the type of insurance you are looking for as they will have different features .
Metlife critical illness insurance pays a lump sum to the beneficiary of the policy if the insured person develops one of the qualifying health conditions . Metlife 's critical illness insurance also offers options for the dependents and spouses or domestic partners of the insured person . It is a group policy .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is It Ethical To Force People To Have Health Insurance ?
Ethics is a big debate on many laws not just health insurance . Unfortunately like so many laws ethics can vary since so many people these days have a different code of ethics . With that being said the law is you must have health insurance or be penalized for not having the coverage .
You ask a philosophical question in a practical environment . My personal opinion is that it is not ethical to force a person to purchase any product or service . The counterpart to that though is that it is not ethical for someone to expect others to pay their health care expenses . In a perfect world everyone would act responsibly , a part of which is managing life 's risks , one of which is your health care needs , both present and future . As experience has shown us , not everyone acts responsibly and every individual has their own idea on what an acceptable level of risk is for them . A health insurance plan with a $ 10,000 deductible would be of no concern to Bill Gates or Donald Trump , that same degree of financial exposure would be a financial catastrophe for a minimum wage worker . Other people are philosophically opposed to the concept of health insurance and others just do n't have enough regard for their fellow citizens that they feel any guilt about passing their burdens off onto their neighbors . Our society is struggling with this issue and will be for years to come . What you must come to grips with is that as of 2014 you now are in a legalenvironment which does essentially require that you have health insurance . Fortunately , at this time , it is not a criminal offense to not have health insurance and you are only subject to a mild -LRB- but growing over time -RRB- penalty for being uninsured .
You ask a philosophical question in a practical environment . My personal opinion is that it is not ethical to force a person to purchase any product or service . The counterpart to that though is that it is not ethical for someone to expect others to pay their health care expenses . In a perfect world everyone would act responsibly , a part of which is managing life 's risks , one of which is your health care needs , both present and future . As experience has shown us , not everyone acts responsibly and every individual has their own idea on what an acceptable level of risk is for them . A health insurance plan with a $ 10,000 deductible would be of no concern to Bill Gates or Donald Trump , that same degree of financial exposure would be a financial catastrophe for a minimum wage worker . Other people are philosophically opposed to the concept of health insurance and others just do n't have enough regard for their fellow citizens that they feel any guilt about passing their burdens off onto their neighbors . Our society is struggling with this issue and will be for years to come . What you must come to grips with is that as of 2014 you now are in a legalenvironment which does essentially require that you have health insurance . Fortunately , at this time , it is not a criminal offense to not have health insurance and you are only subject to a mild -LRB- but growing over time -RRB- penalty for being uninsured .
That 's a tough one to gauge , because not all health insurers are in every state or every county of the states they are in . And most of the data that is compiled is based off of a limited range of surveying . But , to me , you grade a health insurer 's ethics on several factors : the number of people they serve , the number of complaints ruled against them -LRB- not # of filed , because most complaints that are filed are dropped due to consumer 's misrepresentation -RRB- , their financial stability rating to pay claims , and the strictness of underwriting guidelines and # of denied applications -LRB- though you wo n't have to worry about that for the most part starting Jan 1 , 2014 -RRB- . Those are most important , but you secondly should look at their quality of customer service , their rates , number and quality of providers in their network , and type of plan it is -LRB- HMO , PPO , POS , FFS , ACO , etc. -RRB- . It all depends on how each individual defines ethical . Because you might find a company most ethical because they have the best doctors and hospitals in your area , pay their claims fast , have the best customer claims and billing service , and have the lowest complaints . But to another they 're unethical because their rates are 23 % higher , they do n't cover them across state lines , and they would n't insure their wife because she has diabetes . So , it 's really what you value as ethical . But , the best way to find the best company for you , is to find a good local health insurance broker that represents all insurers in your area and ask them those questions . Because , they will know better than anyone which company is best for you and the most ethical because they have dealt with all aspects with most of them on a regular basis . Plus , having a broker or agent on your side , fighting for you on any wrongdoing by the insurance company , will help your case and make your life a whole lot easier and save you time ... You wo n't just be a policy # in a computer , we help you put a face and story to their considerations ! And , even if after a chat with the broker and them recommending some plans , do your own research on those plans . Here are some good resources to look up plans and companies in your area , and how they stack up . Your State Insurance Department is a good start : WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK WEBSITELINK
Ethics is a big debate on many laws not just health insurance . Unfortunately like so many laws ethics can vary since so many people these days have a different code of ethics . With that being said the law is you must have health insurance or be penalized for not having the coverage .
The question of is life insurance ethical could be taken two different ways . First is it ethical to provide an affordable product to protect the ones you love by caring for them financially after you die , I would have to answer yes . We are a consuming society that is bloated in debt , people are failing to save for their own futures , let alone the futures of those that should matter most . I ca n't think of a scenario where life insurance if purchased correctly would be unethical . The second way to read your question would be are life insurance companies ethical . Life insurance companies are some of the most regulated companies of any industry . They must meet federal and state guidelines at all times . Their products must be filed for approval before they are sent to market . My answer to your question asked in this way would also have to be yes . Life insurance is ethical .
If you asking if the concept of Life Insurance is ethical , the conscience of mankind and many religions affirm the concept of making a plan to help care for those for who you are responsible , if you are not there to fulfill those duties due to death . If you are asking if Life Insurance products are ethical , they must meet extremely high standards . If you are asking if the sale of Life Insurance is ethical , that does depend , somewhat , on who you purchase it from . All Life insurance agents are bound by rules of ethics , and must take ethics classes periodically to hold a license . However , you still would be wise to review the agency you are using to be assured that it will go above and beyond to give you a fair and honest assessment .
That 's a great question ! I 'm sure we 'd all agree that we expect all businesses to operate ethically , and with the best of intentions . So I guess your question comes down to one of two things - is life insurance a scam ? Or does the life insurance my company supplies as a part of my benefits package need to be there ? In either case , the answer is that life insurance is a blessing . It is a certainty that you will die . Tough , but true . If your employer provides life insurance for you , and you 've opted to take it and die while employed , that benefit can be a big help in paying for your funeral and providing for those you 've left behind . That is true for the independent policy that you hopefully purchased from a reputable , well respected insurance company . -LRB- And went over thoroughly with an agent that you trust . -RRB- Are there fly by night or poorly managed companies out there that may skirt the edges of ethical integrity ? I 'd like to believe not , but there seems to be a bad apple in every bunch , so it is well for you to look into any company and agency before signing anything . And put stock into the old saying `` if it sounds too good to be true , it probably is '' ... That said , I am sure that the number of ethical agencies far far outweighs the bad ones . Hope that helps ! Any questions , please hit the contact me link , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
In a word yes . It might be easier to think of the Corporation as a separate tax paying entity . There are a number of reasons when the corporation would need or be justified in purchasing life insurance . They include : key person , buy-sell agreements , executive retention . The company would suffer an economic loss and it is prudent for the company to own life insurance . The ethical question has to due with intent . In Canada , if an individual ; is getting a benefit and the company is not getting value from the purchase of a life insurance policy there are issues . May or may not be ethical , but it probably will be a taxable benefit to the individual . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
It is as lucrative as your financial connections or your work ethic . Commission sales people are cut out of certain bred of personality , more so with life insurance sales . The vast majority of life insurance sales people make $ 50,000 a year ; the upper middle class agent makes $ 100,000 . And the few affluent make over $ 250,000 a year like Court or Top of the Table industry recipients .
All commission sales vocations have their challenges and rewards . Some of the best sales persons sell financial products including tax deferred and immediate annuities . If you have a good work ethic , good organizational skills and are great with people you should be able to earn a sold six figure income .
You should be life insurance from an agency that offers a selection , has knowledge of health and products so they can match you with the best one for your health , and does their business in a respectful and ethical manner . Life insurance rates are set , but the health rating you get will affect your rates , and the expertise and customer service of your agent can affect the rating you end up with . Starting out with someone who appears to know what they are doing can save you lots of time , money and frustration .
If you are considering buying Universal Life , you can use it for final expense needs , estate transfer , buy-sell agreements , charitable contributions , retirement income -LRB- IUL -RRB- , and many other purposes . If you already have a Universal Life policy and are wondering whether you should keep it , that depends on how the policy is doing . Many people lost their UL policies in the past decade when interest rates dropped . But if you still have one purchased in the 80 's or 90 's , chances are that you have made adjustments that will last . Consult with an ethical life insurance professional who can study your UL 's performance and help you decide whether or not to keep it .
Well , of course you can , you can lie about virtually anything . The question should be is it ethical to lie about smoking for health insurance ? I suspect that in your heart you know the answer to that question is `` No . '' I presume you are asking this question in regard to the smoker 's penalty that can be applied to individual health insurance rates and that some employer 's utilize . At this time individual health plans are not requiring a screening test to determine if someone is a tobacco user and are relying on the honor system for applicants to self-report their usage . There are some employers that take a more strict approach to this matter and may screen you if they require a pre-employment physical . To be clear , if you are a tobacco user and you apply for health insurance asserting that you are not then you are engaging in fraud . Technically this could result in policy termination but my current understanding is that if the fraud is uncovered then the individual policyholder will be back billed at the tobacco user rate and expected to pay all the extra premium due . However , just because the Affordable Care Act allows for a tobacco use premium penalty does not mean that the health insurance carriers are compelled to apply it . So , you have some carriers that for administrative purposes at this time who are n't bothering with applying the tobacco use penalty and others who are . I would inquire with your insurance broker or the insurance carriers you are considering as to what their current rating approach is to tobacco use . In the employer setting the penalties could be more severe depending upon what their personnel policies are . Honesty is the best policy .
That is a great question ! The answer applies to anyone wanting to find out if being an agent is right for them . If you are looking for easy , fat cash , this job is n't for you . Can you make a very comfortable living ? You bet . But be prepared to work long hours , handle a lot of rejection , and live a life consisting of good weeks , and very lean weeks . Be prepared to have a life without steady paychecks , competing agents willing to steal your business , and clients that will mysteriously decide to cancel their policies -LRB- which costs you money you have to pay back -RRB- . With annuities , be prepared to have a lot of eyes looking over your shoulder for each one you write , and if you decide to work as a captive agent , be prepared for the stress that comes with imposed sales goals . This job can pay very well if you have a heart for the people that you serve , and not the god of money ; and if you have a strong skin and good work ethic . A good lead on some wealthier clientele always helps too ... I hope that helps , I believe in real talk , and you just got some . Thanks for asking !
You do n't ever need to give up term life insurance , and should not do so unless you have given it a lot of thought . Term life insurance is the least expensive type of policy you can get , and most people have gotten the cheapest premium they will ever get on the policy they own right now . The exception to that might be if you had a health condition that has improved or cleared up since you bought your policy ; if you quit smoking over a year since you bought your policy ; if you lost a lot of weight and kept it off for at least a year since you bought your policy ; or if life insurance rates have dropped across the board . You also might find a new , lower rate with another comany , or by taking a shorter term . Visit with a good agent to see if any of these apply to you . If you want more or longer term , sometimes it is more cost efficient to take out a new policy in addition to the one you have . Sometimes it is better to combine both coverages into one new policy . Again , an ethical agent can help you determine what is best in your situation .
The simple answer is `` Yes ! '' Corporate Owned Life Insurance -LRB- COLI -RRB- is ethical . However , in recent years , because of some of the abuses , it has become more scrutinized in its uses . There are many valid reasons for using COLI . It could be very important to a company if a key person in their company died . In some cases , it would take months or years to replace that person with a specific skill set ; so COLI maybe purchased to offset the loss . It may also be used as `` golden handcuffs '' , where the life insurance builds cash value for a future date to pay executive retirement beyond a 401k . This can be done formally , through legal documents -LRB- the IRS even identifies it by code number much like `` 401k '' -RRB- . The unethical part came into play when companies purchased life insurance of people where they had no insurable interest -LRB- in other words would not be at risk of significant loss by the death of the person insured under the policy -RRB- . For example , CompanyZ purchased COLI on all of its 22,000 employees - from executives done to the maintenance.When a rank-in-file employee died , Company Z kept the death benefit , giving them a tax free benefit . The courts decided that Company Z did not have an insurable interest and required them to pay the family the death benefit . The policy was clearly determined not to be COLI but to be STOLI -LRB- Stranger Owned Life Insurance -RRB- .
Some things to look at when comparing Term Life Insurance policies are : 1 -RRB- Length of the term . Longer terms usually cost more , so if you are not comparing policies with the same term , you are not getting a valid comparison . 2 -RRB- Guarantees . If the premium is not guaranteed to stay the same for the entire term , you can not compare it to a policy that is guaranteed to stay the same for the entire term . 3 -RRB- Riders . You need to make sure each policy has the exact same riders -LRB- if any -RRB- to make an accurate comparison . 4 -RRB- Convertibility and/or Living Benefits . These add value to a policy , so keep that in mind if comparing a Term policy with these features to one that does not include them . 5 -RRB- Health Rating . One company may rate you Standard , while the other may rate you Preferred . You pretty much need to talk to an experienced agent to find your best health rating . But another factor is : 6 -RRB- Price . One company may charge you $ 100/mo for Standard , while another company may charge you $ 100/mo for Preferred . So it is important to look at price in addition to health rating . 7 -RRB- Agent . It never hurts to run your Term choices by an agent you can trust , and get their take on the comparisons . Life insurance can be complicated and agents should have the ethics to help you save money while getting the best features .
You get the award for the interesting question of the day . I assume you are a dependent over age 18 to begin with but are still covered under your parents health insurance plan . If you have the financial ability to pay for your own health insurance then technically you can purchase your own coverage . However , a standard part of any insurance application is a section that asks you if you will have any other health insurance coverage in effect at the same time that you will have the policy you are applying for . This is so the insurance carrier you are applying with can coordinate their coverage with the other insurance plan you are covered under . A person can be double covered -LRB- increasingly rare these days -RRB- but you can not make a profit from being insured which would technically be feasible if you filed the same claim independently with each carrier and each insurance carrier was unaware of the other 's coverage of the claim . To notanswer this question honestlywould be toengage in fraud , which could result in claim denial and possible civil liability if the double coverage situation was uncovered . The odds are pretty good that as the claim went through the national data bases that the double coverage situation would be uncovered , it might take some time but it would probably eventually surface . Answering the question honestly , will result in your insurance carrier initiating a coordination of benefits process with your parents insurance carrier in the event of a claim . This would almost certainly result in them receiving some notification from their insurance carrier of this coordination of benefits activity and them becoming aware of the situation . While I understand everyone 's desire for privacy , as a parent myself , I would certainly want to be aware of any health care that my dependent children are receiving , especially when the parent to some extent or another is going to be paying part of the bill either as part of their basic premiums and quite likely as part of deductible and/or copay financial exposure . In essence hiding a separate insurance coverage and medical care from your parents will be very difficult to do and presents you with ethical issues you must be prepared to deal with . If you want total privacy from your parentsin these matters then you must be prepared to tell your parents you no longer want to be covered as a dependent and purchase your own coverage for which you are financially responsible .
You do n't have to worry about your life insurance being cancelled . A life insurance policy that was put into effect ethically will stay in effect whether you contract a life threatening disease , whether you travel to Syria , or whether you start to take drugs . No one would buy life insurance if the company had the option to cancel it on you whenever the risk changed in your life . However , you do have to keep your policy in effect through payment of the premiums -LRB- unless it is a paid up policy or using cash value to pay premiums , so that no more payments are needed -RRB- . If you get cancer and miss two payments of a term policy -LRB- and missing payments is very easy to do when people are hit with a serious illness -RRB- , you will not be getting that policy back by filling out reinstatement paperwork . So take extra care to let the insurance company know when you move or if you change banks so that your policy never lapses due to nonpayment .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Homeowners Insurance Mandatory ?
Check with your attorney but I doubt that your state requires homeowners insurance . Mortgage companies require hazard insurance as a prerequisite to funding a mortgage . They also require that the insurance be maintained . Failure to maintain the insurance will authorize the mortgage company to place the insurance in place and charge you for it . Other than that the only reason to purchase a homeowners policy is a desire to avoid the risks of homeownership .
Homeowners Insurance is not mandatory ; for those that do n't want to be covered by home insurance against the perils of Fire , Wind , Theft , Burglary and Personal Liability , they may self insure at their own risk . If the home owner has taken a mortgage on the property , the mortgage company will require the asset insured thereby requiring the home owner to buy insurance .
There are five states that have mandatory disability insurance laws . These states are : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . The exact provisions of these mandatory disability insurance laws varies by state . You can obtain additional specific information about your state 's mandatory disability insurance law by checking with the states department of insurance -LRB- aka insurance commissioner 's office -RRB- .
Homeowner insurance in any state is mandatory if you have a mortgage but is optional if you do n't . The mortgage company wants to protect their interest in the home by making the homeowner purchase homeowner insurance . Everyone should consider purchasing it to protect your investment and the contents of the home plus your personal liability as the owner of the property . Talk to a local agent and review your specific needs for this type of policy .
Homeowners insurance is mandatory because the house is thecollateral on the debt that you owe the lender . If you did n't pay your mortgage then the bank has the right to foreclose on your property and sell it to recoup the money that they lent you . The lender protects their collateral by being listed on your homeowner policy as `` Loss Payee '' . -LRB- The one paid when a loss happens -RRB- . If their collateral -LRB- your home -RRB- burns up in a fire , and then someone stops paying their mortgage , they would have no asset and no mortgage payments coming in . Item of note : If you decide that you do n't want to have homeowners coverage on the home , the lender can add insurance -LRB- that only protects their interest in the home -RRB- and make you , the homeowner/mortgagee , pay for it on top of their mortgage payment . It is one of the many clauses that you initialed when you signed your mortgage agreement .
Life insurance is not usually mandatory or by law such as car insurance and now health insurance . The exception would be if you were ordered by a judge in a court case such as a divorce or child custody case . The other situation causing life insurance would be a contractual agreement . Some examples of a contractual life insurance agreement would be a secured loan or a business partnership agreement known as `` buy sell life insurance '' . Other than these types of special arrangements life insurance is not considered mandatory , but if someone you care about depends on you for care or finances then out of responsibility you should carry life insurance . Remember life insurance is not for you , it is for them .
Purchasing life insurance is not mandatory , unless it is stipulated in a contract you sign or a loan that you take out . Of course , the insurance company will also decide if you have an insurable interest , allowing you to purchase coverage . But in the vast majority of situations , buying life insurance is not mandatory .
The first actual mandatory auto insurance was in 1927 in the state of Massachusetts . Shortly after most other states began mandating auto insurance . Allot has changed in the laws over the years as it relates to financial responsibility but mandatory auto insurance has been around for a long time . Insurance is state regulated , not federal . There is a couple of states still do not mandate auto insurance if you can demonstrate the financial means to cover the minimum amounts for bodily injury , property damage and liability in that state . Of course you might as well put a sign around your neck that says please sue me , I have money .
That is a great question ! The answer is one of those , `` no , but you should '' answers . Like health insurance is n't mandatory , having it is very wise , and not having it has penalties . It iskind of like that with your prescription coverage . While it is n't mandatory to have , the cost of your prescriptions without it is often prohibitive . A prescription that Medicare covers may only cost you a couple of dollars , that without the coverage would cost $ 45-50 dollars or more . On a fixed income , and looking at stretching a retirement fund , I 'd wholeheartedly recommend that you enroll in the plan . Thanks for asking !
No , the State of CT does not make it mandatory to have Homeowners ' Insurance , but if you have a Mortgage , then your lender does . When you are buying a home or otherwise obtaining a mortgage or home equity on a home , your lender , among other things will ask you to provide a copy of a binder or amended Homeowners Declaration Sheet showing them listed as an interested party on your property . They do this to protect their own interest , which makes perfect sense . However , if you have property , mortgage or not , this can be one of the most important investments you will make in your lifetime . Frankly , mandatrory or not , you owe it to yourself to protect your own interest and your family 's home .
PIP is mandatory in some states . PIP stands for Personal Injury Protection and it covers you and or a passenger . You can select full PIP coverage or limited PIP coverage which would just cover a passenger . Most companies offer limits of $ 2,500 or $ 5,000 . States with mandatory PIP coverage Delaware Florida WEBSITELINK Hawaii Kansas Kentucky Maryland -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB- Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota New Jersey New York North Dakota Oregon Pennsylvania Texas -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy also known as the exclusion agreement -RRB- Utah Washington -LRB- unless a waiver is signed at initial purchase of the policy -RRB-
Auto insurance is mandatory here in Ohio . As an Ohio broker since 1980 -LRB- Has it been that long ? -RRB- , we help consumers meet the mandatory minimum liability requirement in the most affordable way . By shopping multiple companies , consumers can view and compare the lowest rates . Also , keep in mind that it is always a good idea to consider liability limits higher than what is legally required . Although youthful rates can be a bit expensive , as you get older , rates typically reduce quite a bit . This is an ideal time to review your existing coverage . Ironically , the Ohio state minimum limits were recently increased from $ 12,500 / $ 25,000 to $ 25,000 / $ 50,000 . It had been quite a while since the limits were increased .
As Mr. Harris indicates , car insurance is mandatory in all States . Mandatory auto insurance limits vary by State , however . The specific limits for your State can be found on your particular State 's Insurance Commissioner website or by simply searching the web for auto liability limits , with the name of your State . Limits vary from $ 10,000 / $ 20,000 / $ 10,000 in Florida -LRB- Yikes ! -RRB- to $ 50,000 / $ 100,000 / $ 55,000 in Wisconsin . The first two dollar amounts are for bodily injury from an accident and the third amount is for property damage to others , from that accident . For example : Using Wisconsin limits , In an insured driver 's liability situation , the policy would pay no more than $ 50,000 to any one injured person but no more than $ 100,000 , no matter how many people were injured . So , if three people were injured and two of them received $ 50,000 each , the third injured person would not be collecting from the policy , since the $ 100,000 limit would have been exhausted . As for the property damage to others , the policy would pay no more than $ 55,000 in total to one or more claimants . .
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
Homeowners Insurance is not mandatory ; for those that do n't want to be covered by home insurance against the perils of Fire , Wind , Theft , Burglary and Personal Liability , they may self insure at their own risk . If the home owner has taken a mortgage on the property , the mortgage company will require the asset insured thereby requiring the home owner to buy insurance .
Home insurance is not mandatory in California . But any financial institution that loans you money to buy real property can require you carry HO insurance . If you fail to procure a policy , they will buy one for you and charge you for that . Also , if your property is located in the flood zone area , the same lender may also require you buying flood insurance . The only thing I have n't seen required from the Homeowner is an earthquake insurance . However , we strongly suggest you review you options . Nowadays , with theCalifornia Earthquake Authority -LRB- CEA -RRB- this coverage became much more affordable than before .
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
Home insurance is not legally mandatory in any State including California . If a mortgage contract exists against the home , it is likely that the mortgagee requires at least a basic Fire & Lightning policy on the home to protect the collateral security for the mortgage . If on the other hand , there is no mortgage , it would not be adviseable for one to take the risk of fire or personal liability alone . One may purchase a Homeowners Insurance policy with a very high deductible thus generating a comparatively much lower rate in order to have coverage should a major catastrophe occur . Arizona , California & Nevada free quotes are available online at : WEBSITELINK
That 's a great question ! Many mortgage lenders will require that you have some form of proof that they can get paid in the event your home were damaged or destroyed before they were fully paid off . That is usually done through your homeowners insurance or private mortgage insurance -LRB- pmi -RRB- . So while it is n't mandatory to have insurance , most lenders are going to want to know that their money is safe , and will require insurance before lending you their money . And unless you are very financially secure , it always is wise to have a way to cover the risks of losing your belongings , home , or protecting against being sued . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is The Average Disability Insurance Cost ?
This is a difficult question for an average answer . There are just too many moving parts with underwriting and pricing disability coverage . It depends on age , build , occupation , income , life style , health status , elimination and benefit periods just to name a few . Having said that you can plan on spending 1 % to 3 % of your annual income to a long term disability plan to protect your most valuable asset , your ability to earn a living .
An Average person driving an average car living in an average neighborhood with an average driving record who wants average coverage 's and drives an average amount of miles and holds an average job with an average wife and average kids and an average income would surely pay an average price . However as an agent to be a little more specific I would need the answers to what is average .
The average cost of life insurance varies so much that it is impossible to state a meaningful figure . What is average for a 20 year old male is a far cry of what is average for an 80 year old male . Those two persons generally do n't even need the same face amounts or purchase the same type of policies . To find the average cost of Term Life Insurance for a relatively healthy person , you can use quote engines on websites that will show that . Better yet is to call the website or a local agency , and discuss your health and the type of policy you want . If they have several companies that will cover you with the same type of policy , that is a good way to see an average price of what life insurance would cost for you .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
The most recent figures for late March , 2014 indicate that the average cost of an individual major medical health insurance policy in the United States is $ 328 per month . That said , your results can and almost certainly will vary . A national average figure is not likely to be reflective of what the cost would be for you in the specific area of the state that you are a resident in . Also , this average figure does not take into account any possible advanced premium tax subsidy a person might qualify for , which would reduce that person 's net cost of insurance . Individual health insurance rates can vary wildly from one state to another and can vary significantly within the various regions that each state is subdivided into under the structure imposed by the Affordable Care Act . And the reported national average price becomes an even more unreliable yardstick because it also averages in a wide range of levels of insurance coverage . As an analogy , you can get an average cost for a new car purchase in the U.S. but that may bear little resemblance to the price of the specific car you want to buy .
The cost of life insurance increases with age . Obviously , the older we get the more likely we are to die , resulting in the life insurance company paying out a claim . In the words of George Lopez , `` Each Birthday is just another year closer to death '' or `` Studies have shown that the more birthdays you have the longer you live '' . The life insurance industry has amassed a large amount of data at what age people die and the cause of death . With a large enough population , they can predict accurately the average age of a man & woman at death , which helps them derive the cost of insurance based on the age of the insured . For example , in a 20-yr level term , they simply average out the cost of insurance for that 20 year span . For a permanent policy , they simply average the cost until the average age of death . So , all life insurance costs increase as we grow older . That is the reason why the premiums for insurance are much cheaper when we are younger . One last consideration ... because the cost of insurance increases , if you purchased a permanent -LRB- eg universal life , variable universal , etc -RRB- and paid only minimum premiums to keep the policy going , you may receive notification that you need to pay a large sum in premium to keep the insurance in force . This occurs when a policy is underfunded or in other words , the policy owner did not pay enough premiums in to the policy over time and it can not sustain the cost to pay out the death benefit .
The average rating people get for life insurance is Standard . From that , you can determine the average cost for persons of different ages . Keep in mind that the average cost for an 80 year old is going to be much different than the average cost for a 20 year old . As will the average cost for someone with diabetes as compared with someone with perfect health . The length of the term , or whether the policy is a permanent policy , have a great effect on the premium , as well . It is a good idea to go into a life insurance sale with your top dollar that you can spend , in mind . Then see if you can get a policy that suits your needs for a premium a little lower than that . Something is better than nothing , and by consulting with an honest and knowledgeable agent , most people can find coverage at a price they can afford .
In 2014 the national average cost of a Silver level plan -LRB- approximately 70 % coverage level and the most common plan design purchased -RRB- was $ 328 per month . This cost , in the overwhelming number of cases , will increase for 2015 plan year rates . As this is a national average figure and health insurance costs vary significantly from state to state , between regions within a state , and between different insurance carriers , it is only the roughest approximation of what health insurance might cost you . Your age and tobacco use status , plus the health insurance plan and insurance carrier you select are the primary factors in determining what your specific individual health insurance rates will be . Finally , whether or not you fall within the income ranges where you would qualify for some degree of an advanced premium tax subsidy will also factor into what your final monthly cost for individual health insurance would be .
Certainly long term disability insurance is risk management tool that every responsible person needs to seriously consider . The average working age American has about a 25 % chance of being disabled for some portion of their life . So , 75 % of us avoid disability if you look on the bright side but a 1 out of 4 chance that you 'll be the unlucky person is pretty sobering . Your chances of being disabled for some period are far higher than your odds of winning the Powerball Lottery . And , if you do experience a disability close to 40 % of those unlucky persons experience a disability period in excess of 5 years with the average disability lasting 82 months from recent figures I saw . The challenge , as with so many things in life , is effectively managing all the risks that life presents us with . Health care , dental care , vision care , the risk of death , oh and somewhere in there you 've got to eat and have shelter and live a life . I ca n't say that long term disability insurance should be your number one priority over eating but it 's certainly more important than having a set of spinners on your car or having the ultimate man cave . Disability insurance should be high on your list of risks to manage and the younger in life you make the commitment the more economical it will be .
Based on data compiled for health insurance plans in 2014 with the new mandated coverage under the Affordable Care Act , the weighted average of a benchmark -LRB- silver , or 70 % benefit level -RRB- health insurance plan in Kansas is $ 260 ; which is below the $ 328 national weighted average . As for current Kansas averages , the 2013 data is not accurately completed and compiled yet . But by best estimates of 2013 data , the average premium in Kansas is $ 182 , but does not disclose or reflect benefit levels or type of coverage -LRB- the national average benefit level is 78 % -RRB- . So , in conclusion , a resident of Kansas can expect to pay on average $ 182 for a health plan the remainder of 2013 , and then $ 260 starting 2014 -LRB- a 43 % increase from 2013 , which is in line with the national weighted average of overall premium increases -RRB- . But , premiums vary widely across the state and by county , and by age .
Because it 's not going to happen to them and it 's expensive . But the truth is the cost of the coverage is not nearly as expensive as the average cost of care and there is a pretty darned good chance they WILL need care . Roughly 70 % of people over 65 will need long term care services in their lifetime , 40 % of people currently receiving long term care services are aged 10-64 ! Average home health care expenses in Illinois average over $ 45,000 while a semi-private room averages around $ 70,000 , FAR more than the cost of the coverage to pay for it .
Who is the average person and how much of their compensation does average person want to protect ? Long term disability insurance is paycheck insurance . First determine if your tax bracket warrants deducting the disability insurance premium as a legitimate business . If the answer is yes , apply for 80 % of your compensation . Keep in mind that the benefits will be taxable as ordinary income . If the answer is no , apply for 60 % of your compensation , your benefits will be tax free . Whats the cost ? Whats your gender , age , smoking status , health history , current medical condition ? Whats the amount you want to cover ? How long do you want coverage to last ? What elimination period do you require based on your current cash reserves ? It is possible that you may pay between 3-5 % of the compensation youre attempting to indemnify .
As of July 2013 the average car insurance policy in the United States cost $ 964 per year . In Wisconsin the average policy cost $ 770 . So yes , on average , auto insurance appears to b cheaper in Wisconsin . Keep in mind that these are averages and your individual circumstances may result in higher or lower rates in Wisconsin .
Disability insurance is paycheck protection 24/7 , unlike workers comp , which pays for injuries experienced on the job . Social security disability can help , but in most cases its inadequate . It is possible that you may have short term disability through your employers group benefit plan . Still the combination of all three will generally fall short of sufficient coverage . The average American worker has 90 days in cash reserves . The average long term disability period is 30 months . The odds of being disabled during your working life are a statistical probability , more than death . Is disability insurance protection with 5-8 % of your pay ? You make the call !
Disability insurance is extremely important . The mantra is buy term and spend the difference on disability insurance . Anyone who earns a living and wants to protect their paycheck should get disability insurance . The statistical odds of becoming disabled during your working life are too great to ignore . The average disability period is 30 months ; the average emergency cash reserve is 90 days . And it is highly recommended that you also insurance your retirement contributions as well .
Any person who is dependent on an income needs disability insurance . DI protects your income in case you can no longer work due to a sickness or injury . It allows you to stay financially afloat by covering whatever you need , from bills , your mortgage , co-pays , etc. . The average person only has 90 days of cash reserves , yet the average long term disability claim is 31.2 months ... a lot more than what the average person has on hand !
The average cost of disability insurance is between 1 and 3 % of one 's annual salary . Women pay a little more because they have more frequent and longer claims , on average . If a supplemental policy to boost the income replaced by a group policy , the average cost is 1 % of one 's annual salary .
The average cost of life insurance in Oregon depends on many factors . One big factor is age . A $ 250,000 twenty year Term policy for a 30 year old male at the best health class averages about $ 200 per year . At age 50 , the average rate for that same policy is approximately $ 600 per year IF he still has excellent health . The length of the term is also a big factor . Shorter terms cost less , but as can be seen in the example above . locking in the premium for as long as possible is often a good idea . That is partly because health also greatly affects life insurance rates , and health is more apt to slip away as people age . To find the average life insurance cost in the state of Oregon for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes and test out some different face amounts and term lengths . Then give that agency a call so that you can be sure all your health details are taken into consideration . That will help you get a fair price .
What is the average cost of health insurance ? Well , it 's going to depend on plan features , the age of the insured and the cost of care in their area . There really is n't a true average cost of health insurance as it just depends on who , what and where you are .
The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , each individual health plan is guaranteed-issue , meaning you can not be declined for health insurance for a pre-existing condition or other health-related issue , nor charged a higher amount -LRB- e.g. level 1 rates , level 2 rates , level 3 rates , etc. as it was under the old structures -RRB- . If you 're an individual buying on or off the exchange -LRB- and not securing group coverage through an employer -RRB- , you need to consider the level plan you want . There are four metal plans : bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Bronze plans generally cover about 60 % of your healthcare expenses , Silver is 70 % , Gold is 80 % , and Platinum is 90 % . So , in short , the better the benefits that you want to have , the higher the premium will be . There 's also a catastrophic plan , but these are only available to individuals under age 30 . Your premiums are now based on the type of plan you have , your zip code , whether you use tobacco products or not , and your age - premiums will vary by carrier . You may also have a subsidy available to you to reduce the cost of your health insurance premium . There are many factors that go into the pricing of a product for a specific area . Everyone 's tolerance for cost is different as well . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker to help you determine the plan that 's going to be suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Is Average Life Insurance ?
The average cost of life insurance varies so much that it is impossible to state a meaningful figure . What is average for a 20 year old male is a far cry of what is average for an 80 year old male . Those two persons generally do n't even need the same face amounts or purchase the same type of policies . To find the average cost of Term Life Insurance for a relatively healthy person , you can use quote engines on websites that will show that . Better yet is to call the website or a local agency , and discuss your health and the type of policy you want . If they have several companies that will cover you with the same type of policy , that is a good way to see an average price of what life insurance would cost for you .
An Average person driving an average car living in an average neighborhood with an average driving record who wants average coverage 's and drives an average amount of miles and holds an average job with an average wife and average kids and an average income would surely pay an average price . However as an agent to be a little more specific I would need the answers to what is average .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
The average cost of auto insurance per year is going to vary from state to state and more specifically , person to person . Almost all -LRB- if not all -RRB- insurance companies look at an individuals credit score , among other factors , to determine their ` insurance score ' . If you have a lower insurance score , your premium will be lower and visa versa . It 's very difficult to determine the average without factoring in credit , state , year-make-model of car , how much you drive , and your experience level among a host of other attributes . The state of Oklahoma for example is on average , much higher than the state of Missouri . One of the biggest reasons is due to natural risk , or geographic risk . IE ... more storms in Oklahoma Vs. Missouri . I 'm sure a simple google search would provide an average vs all states and credit scores . Although I would be skeptical of that number generated due to all the variances that determine the price .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much a specific individual should be paying for health insurance is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost per person in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . You may also have options for group coverage through your employer . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
On average $ 10-15 per month , however , that doesnt even indicate how much it might cost you . Your location , loss experience and policy limits could vary a great deal from average . The better question is , How much can you pay in damages if someone is hurt in your unit , or if everything goes up in smoke , how will you get the money to start over ?
To figure out how much life insurance you need with kids , you can make a little worksheet . Put down how much your family spends on average each year , and subtract your spouse 's salary from that . The difference is what you need to cover . Multiple it by how many years until your children are adults . Throw in extra for college . That is how much life insurance you may want to purchase .
The average cost of life insurance varies so much that it is impossible to state a meaningful figure . What is average for a 20 year old male is a far cry of what is average for an 80 year old male . Those two persons generally do n't even need the same face amounts or purchase the same type of policies . To find the average cost of Term Life Insurance for a relatively healthy person , you can use quote engines on websites that will show that . Better yet is to call the website or a local agency , and discuss your health and the type of policy you want . If they have several companies that will cover you with the same type of policy , that is a good way to see an average price of what life insurance would cost for you .
Based on data compiled for health insurance plans in 2014 with the new mandated coverage under the Affordable Care Act , the weighted average of a benchmark -LRB- silver , or 70 % benefit level -RRB- health insurance plan in Kansas is $ 260 ; which is below the $ 328 national weighted average . As for current Kansas averages , the 2013 data is not accurately completed and compiled yet . But by best estimates of 2013 data , the average premium in Kansas is $ 182 , but does not disclose or reflect benefit levels or type of coverage -LRB- the national average benefit level is 78 % -RRB- . So , in conclusion , a resident of Kansas can expect to pay on average $ 182 for a health plan the remainder of 2013 , and then $ 260 starting 2014 -LRB- a 43 % increase from 2013 , which is in line with the national weighted average of overall premium increases -RRB- . But , premiums vary widely across the state and by county , and by age .
How much renters insurance premiums depend on how much coverage you actually would like to carry on your personal items and how much liability protection you would like to obtain . Rates can run as low as 100.00 - 300.00 per year on average . I recommend you consult a local independent agent and discuss your personal needs .
The average rating people get for life insurance is Standard . From that , you can determine the average cost for persons of different ages . Keep in mind that the average cost for an 80 year old is going to be much different than the average cost for a 20 year old . As will the average cost for someone with diabetes as compared with someone with perfect health . The length of the term , or whether the policy is a permanent policy , have a great effect on the premium , as well . It is a good idea to go into a life insurance sale with your top dollar that you can spend , in mind . Then see if you can get a policy that suits your needs for a premium a little lower than that . Something is better than nothing , and by consulting with an honest and knowledgeable agent , most people can find coverage at a price they can afford .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
How much is the average renter 's insurance premium ? Not much ! Renter 's insurance typically is inexpensive and costs about $ 100 - $ 240 per year , depending on where you live and how much contentcoverageyou need . Of course , there are many other variables including other types of insurance you have with the carrier , your credit and past claims history .
The most recent figures for late March , 2014 indicate that the average cost of an individual major medical health insurance policy in the United States is $ 328 per month . That said , your results can and almost certainly will vary . A national average figure is not likely to be reflective of what the cost would be for you in the specific area of the state that you are a resident in . Also , this average figure does not take into account any possible advanced premium tax subsidy a person might qualify for , which would reduce that person 's net cost of insurance . Individual health insurance rates can vary wildly from one state to another and can vary significantly within the various regions that each state is subdivided into under the structure imposed by the Affordable Care Act . And the reported national average price becomes an even more unreliable yardstick because it also averages in a wide range of levels of insurance coverage . As an analogy , you can get an average cost for a new car purchase in the U.S. but that may bear little resemblance to the price of the specific car you want to buy .
A quote , in short , is an estimation of premium you can expect to pay for your life insurance policy - the premiums can be paid annually , semi-annually , quarterly , or monthly . Please note , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . There are 4 main factors that determine the premium for the coverage - your age , the amount of coverage you 're trying to secure , how long you want it guaranteed for , and your risk classification . The risk classification is the MOST important factor in determining how much you can expect to/will pay for your coverage . If the medical history is not factored into the quote -LRB- e.g. you 're only running numbers based on someone 's date of birth and/or height/weight -RRB- , any quotes provided are pretty much meaningless because they do not provide an accurate representation of what you can expect to be approved at . To provide a little background on risk classes : every life insurance company has different underwriting guidelines that determine what risk class an individual qualifies for . Since every company has different guidelines for qualification , one might offer a better risk class than another based on the aforementioned information , resulting in a lower premium for the same coverage . The different risk classes someone can be assigned by a carrier are : Preferred Plus -LRB- sometimes seen as Preferred Elite -RRB- this means the proposed insured is typically in superior health , normal height/weight profile , no chronic illnesses , lab results within normal range , no immediate family members died from heart disease or cancer before age 60 . Preferred this means the proposed insured is in excellent health . Height/weight may be a little over the most preferred range , treatment for high blood pressure or high cholesterol usually acceptable , lab results normal or slightly abnormal . Standard Plus - this means the proposed insured 's health is better than the average . Height/weight may be higher than normal . Standard - this means the proposed insured is in average health and has a normal life expectancy . Height/weight may be on the high side , possible treatment for several minor conditions , one or more parents died from heart disease/cancer before age 60 , slightly elevated lab results -LRB- such as higher than normal blood pressure or cholesterol -RRB- . Substandard - this means the proposed insured has a below average life expectancy -LRB- commonly seen as high risk life insurance -RRB- . Height/weight may be considered obese , treatment for chronic illnesses or major health conditions -LRB- such as prior heart attack , cancer , diabetes -RRB- , abnormal lab results . Substandard ratings are expressed as a table rating , usually designated as Tables A-J or 1-10 . Each additional table increase is usually a 25 % increase over the standard risk class rates . Tobacco user risk classes are preferred smoker , standard smoker , and substandard smoker . There is no preferred plus or standard plus risk classification for tobacco users . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your case among multiple carriers to see who will offer you the most favorable risk classification for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A quote , in short , is an estimation of premium you can expect to pay for your life insurance policy - the premiums can be paid annually , semi-annually , quarterly , or monthly . Please note , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . There are 4 main factors that determine the premium for the coverage - your age , the amount of coverage you 're trying to secure , how long you want it guaranteed for , and your risk classification . The risk classification is the MOST important factor in determining how much you can expect to/will pay for your coverage . If the medical history is not factored into the quote -LRB- e.g. you 're only running numbers based on someone 's date of birth and/or height/weight -RRB- , any quotes provided are pretty much meaningless because they do not provide an accurate representation of what you can expect to be approved at . To provide a little background on risk classes : every life insurance company has different underwriting guidelines that determine what risk class an individual qualifies for . The company will look at your personal medical history , smoker status , height/weight profile , results of the medical exam -LRB- if applying for a policy requiring it - no exam policies typically cost more -RRB- , your family medical history -LRB- e.g. cancer or heart disease before age 60 in the immediate family -RRB- , motor vehicle record , and any hazardous activities you may participate in -LRB- such as aviation , scuba diving , drag racing , etc -RRB- . Since every company has different guidelines for qualification , one might offer a better risk class than another based on the aforementioned information , resulting in a lower premium for the same coverage . The different risk classes someone can be assigned by a carrier are : Preferred Plus -LRB- sometimes seen as Preferred Elite -RRB- this means the proposed insured is typically in superior health , normal height/weight profile , no chronic illnesses , lab results within normal range , no immediate family members died from heart disease or cancer before age 60 . Preferred this means the proposed insured is in excellent health . Height/weight may be a little over the most preferred range , treatment for high blood pressure or high cholesterol usually acceptable , lab results normal or slightly abnormal . Standard Plus - this means the proposed insured 's health is better than the average . Height/weight may be higher than normal . Standard - this means the proposed insured is in average health and has a normal life expectancy . Height/weight may be on the high side , possible treatment for several minor conditions , one or more parents died from heart disease/cancer before age 60 , slightly elevated lab results -LRB- such as higher than normal blood pressure or cholesterol -RRB- . Substandard - this means the proposed insured has a below average life expectancy -LRB- commonly seen as high risk life insurance -RRB- . Height/weight may be considered obese , treatment for chronic illnesses or major health conditions -LRB- such as prior heart attack , cancer , diabetes -RRB- , abnormal lab results . Substandard ratings are expressed as a table rating , usually designated as Tables A-J or 1-10 . Each additional table increase is usually a 25 % increase over the standard risk class rates . Tobacco user risk classes are preferred smoker , standard smoker , and substandard smoker . There is no preferred plus or standard plus risk classification for tobacco users . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your case among multiple carriers to see who will offer you the most favorable risk classification for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is A Life Insurance Beneficiary Responsible For Debt ?
No , although creditors may find out you received the tax-free death benefit and try to convince you that you have to pay the debt of the one who passed away . IF debt is owed , that is where probate comes in . Generally the proceeds received from a Life Insurance policy are free from probate . Probate will go after the Estate and may decide that some of the monies in the estate , ie . the sale of a house , car , etc. . go to pay that past debt .
If you were a cosigner for the debt that was incurred by the person who died , then you will most likely be responsible to repay the debt with the life insurance proceeds that were left to you . If you did not share in the debt that was incurred by the person who died , then the life insurance money that was left to you belongs to you .
Life insurance does not go to the debt of the person who died , unless the life insurance proceeds go to his/her estate . If the money goes to the estate , debt collectors will collect from it . Another way life insurance might go to pay off debt incurred by the Insured , is if the beneficiary was a co-signer for the Insured 's debt -LRB- in community property states , a spouse may need to pay off the debt even if their name was not on the contract -RRB- . If not a co-signer -LRB- or not the surviving spouse in a community property state -RRB- , the beneficiary does not need to pay off the debt of the Insured , unless they want to . If it is the beneficiary who has debts and receives a life insurance death benefit , each state has their own limitations on whether or not debt collectors can come after your life insurance proceeds . This website tells about the debt collection laws from some states : WEBSITELINK
If the debts belong to the person who passed away , and if the beneficiary on his/her policy is the estate , then the debt collectors will go after the life insurance proceeds to pay off the deceased person 's outstanding debts . If the beneficiary of the deceased person 's policy is a person , debt collectors can not go after the insurance proceeds unless the beneficiary was a co-signer of the debt along with the deceased person . If it is the beneficiary who has the debts , then the life insurance proceeds received will be fair game for debt collectors .
Debt collectors can go after life insurance if the insurance proceeds go to the estate of the insured . If the insured person passes away with debts and their beneficiary is their estate , debt collectors can try to get their life insurance . If the insured person passes away with debts but leaves the life insurance proceeds to a person , debt collectors can not go after life insurance from that person . The only way they can go after life insurance proceeds from the beneficiary is if the beneficiary was a co-signer to the debt .
Creditors can not go after the life insurance payout to pay the debts of the deceased insured person , as long as the beneficiary or beneficiaries who are receiving the life insurance proceeds are actual people . Life insurance bypasses probate , so the creditor does not have the opportunity to access the life insurance payout . If the beneficiary is the insured person 's estate , the creditors may be able to go after the life insurance death benefit to pay the debts of the insured . If the beneficiary is the one who has the debts , then the creditors can go after the life insurance payout . This is also true if the beneficiary shared a debt with the deceased .
A life insurance claim isonly createdat a death of an insuredand passes to another beneficiary . Therefore the person in debt has now passed on along with their debts . The beneficiary has no responsibility for the deceased debts . Any monies paid on behalf of the deceased is strictly voluntary by the beneficiary .
If you are the beneficiary of a life insurance policy , and you owe debt , debt collectors may go after your life insurance proceeds . State law places some limits on the amount they can take . If you are the beneficiary of a life insurance policy and the deceased owed debt at the time of death , debt collectors can not take your life insurance unless you were a co-signer for that debt . They can also go after the life insurance money if there was no beneficiary , but if the death benefit went to the estate .
Debtors who are collecting on a debt left by the insured person who died , can not collect it from the life insurance left to the beneficiary , unless the beneficiary was co-signer on the debt . If the debt was incurred by the beneficiary , then debtors can come after the life insurance that the beneficiary collected upon the death of the Insured .
Good question . In general , No . I say this , because , the estate of a deceased person is typically responsible for his or her debt . If creditors come back to a deceased person 's estate to attempt to collect , they do so during the probate process . When structured correctly , life insurance will be paid directly to a beneficiary , and bypass the probate process . Now , there are always caveats . If you were a co-owner on the debt , or in the case where a spouse survives the deceased , the creditor may still require payment . Life insurance proceeds could be used to offset this , but in general , life insurance is paid directly to the beneficiary .
The only time debt collectors can come after life insurance proceeds is if it is the beneficiary who has the debt . This may be because they cosigned a loan with the person who passed away , or it may be because they have their own debts , and the lender found out they have some money to apply toward the loan . Lenders can not take away life insurance proceeds from a beneficiary to pay for a debt left by the insured person who died .
If life insurance proceeds in Georgia are left to a person as beneficiary , creditors can not take the money away from the beneficiary to pay the debts of the insured , -LRB- unless the beneficiary was co-signer to that debt -RRB- . If the life insurance proceeds are left to the estate , then creditors in Georgia can access those benefits to pay off the debt owed them by the deceased .
Debt comes in various colors . The interest on mortgage debt is a deductible item on your income taxes . Other forms of debt are not deductible . The interest rate charged on some debt is negligible while the cost of other debt can be onerous . Credit card debt comes to mind when I think of high interest rates . While I appreciate the thoughts about retiring debt before starting a retirement program , I think it would be wise to discuss this with a tax expert . Taxation can play a vital role in this decision because the contributions to a retirement program receive favored tax treatment , where plain ordinary debt doesnt . It seems to me that the key question is the extent to which the debt is exerting pressure on the family . If it is a small amount and being retired in a systematic manner , I think that starting a retirement program at the same time makes good sense . Dont forget that what a retirement program needs is time . Shifting capital into retirement early can be quite helpful .
If the insured person passes away with outstanding debts , and the beneficiary of the policy is his/her estate , creditors can attempt to get life insurance money to repay those debts . If the beneficiary is a person , the person is safe from the insured person 's creditors , unless the beneficiary is a co-signer to the deceased 's debts .
Creditors can not reach life insurance proceeds to pay off the debts of the deceased insured person unless the beneficiary of the policy was not a person . I.e. . If the insured named his/her `` estate '' as the beneficiary , then the policy proceeds go through probate , giving creditors for the deceased , access to those funds . If the beneficiary is a person , the life insurance proceeds do not usually go through probate , but directly to that person . Creditors can not reach the money that went to the beneficiary unless the beneficiary shared the debt with the deceased .
If you were a cosigner for the debt that was incurred by the person who died , then you will most likely be responsible to repay the debt with the life insurance proceeds that were left to you . If you did not share in the debt that was incurred by the person who died , then the life insurance money that was left to you belongs to you .
If the person who passed is the one with the debt , and if that person was the Insured person on the policy , then creditors can only take life insurance money left if the beneficiary was the Insured 's estate . If the Insured chose a person as the beneficiary , creditors can not take life insurance money from the beneficiary , unless perhaps the beneficiary was a co-signers on the insured person 's debt .
Life insurance proceeds are usually protected from creditors in New York if the beneficiary of the policy is a person or other entity besides the estate . If the beneficiary is the estate , then the life insurance proceeds are subject to probate and creditors will try to get the debt repaid at that time . However , creditors can not go after life insurance left to a beneficiary unless that beneficiary also shared in the debt .
Does life insurance pay debts ? NO ! Depending on the kind of policy you have , if you have Whole Life you can use the Cash Value in the policy to pay debts if you want . But if there is a life insurance policy in place at the time of death of the insured , the insurance company will pay the death Benefit to the Beneficiaries . Then the Beneficiaries may use the money for anything they choose . If they choose to pay debts with the money , they may do so .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is : What does term life insurance cover ? Remember first of all , if we 're using term , it only covers that period in time . If you buy a 20-year term , as an example , it 's only going to cover you for 20 years . If you buy $ 1/2 million dollars of death benefit , you 'll have it for as long as you pay your premiums on time ; you 'll have that coverage . What is it good for ? How does it cover ? It 's going to cover anything that you think that you need . Let 's say , at $ 1/2 million , you had a mortgage at $ 250,000 , you had credit card debt , you had car debt , you had educational debt . You want to cover that so that your spouse or your beneficiaries will not be actually saddled with your debt if something happened to you . When I 'm looking at , ` What does term life insurance ? ' it 's the time zone , how long do I have , what obligations would I have , and how can I relieve my beneficiaries from any of those obligations if something happens to me ?
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Get Life Insurance If I Have Epilepsy ?
Yes , you can get life insurance if you have epilepsy . The type of policy you can get and the premiums will depend on how well controlled your epilepsy is . If you have had no seizures in the past couple of years , you can work full time , and your medication has been effective and stable for some time , you can most likely get a medically underwritten policy of any amount that you wish . If you have had recent seizures , especially if Grand Mal seizures , and epilepsy auses you to be on Disability , there are No Exam policies that you can get in most states in the US . They may or may not be graded and there will be a cap on the amount of coverage . But it is still possible to find affordable life insurance while having any type of epilepsy , for most people .
Yes , you can get life insurance if you have epilepsy . The type of policy you can get and the premiums will depend on how well controlled your epilepsy is . If you have had no seizures in the past couple of years , you can work full time , and your medication has been effective and stable for some time , you can most likely get a medically underwritten policy of any amount that you wish . If you have had recent seizures , especially if Grand Mal seizures , and epilepsy auses you to be on Disability , there are No Exam policies that you can get in most states in the US . They may or may not be graded and there will be a cap on the amount of coverage . But it is still possible to find affordable life insurance while having any type of epilepsy , for most people .
People with epilepsy can get life insurance . If the epilepsy does not interfere with your normal life -LRB- i.e. you are able to work full time and have not had a seizure for over 5 years -RRB- , you should be able to get a regular , medically underwritten policy of any amount , een if you have Grand Mal epilepsy . Most people with epilepsy have their condition so well controlled that you would not even know they have it , unless they quit taking their medication . Some life insurance companies take that into consideration and give lower rates . If the epilepsy is uncontrolled -LRB- seizures within the past year -RRB- , there are simplified issue policies that can be obtained , up to a certain amount of coverage .
Epilepsy is a disorder of the brain and nervous system involving repeated random seizures that occur without warning . If you have been diagnosed with epilepsy and are trying to purchase life insurance , the severity of the disease can have an effect on the rates you pay . Life insurance companies will want to know a number of factors to make an accurate risk assessment including : 1 . What age were you diagnosed with epilepsy ? 2 . Do you have Grand Mal , Petite , or Focal seizures ? 3 . When was your most recent seizure ? How many have you had in the last year , 2 years , 5 years , etc. ? 4 . Have you ever been hospitalized for epilepsy ? 5 . Are you taking prescription medication to control symptoms ? 6 . Are you a smoker or tobacco user ? 7 . What is your height/weight ? 8 . Any other co-morbid conditions such as diabetes , obesity , heart disease , etc ? If you have been diagnosed with epilepsy , you should not apply with multiple companies at the same time - this can work against you as it will act as a sort of red flag for the insurance companies -LRB- they will see that you 've applied for multiple carriers and what the outcomes were during the MIB check -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- -RRB- . The more companies that give you a table rating or decline coverage on a formal application , the less likely you are to get a better offer . You need the help of an independent life insurance agent that can shop your medical profile informally . We specialize in high risk life insurance and make sure you are getting the best possible offer - we 're licensed in many states around the country . Send me a message if we can be of assistance securing a policy for you - my contact information is available on my profile .
Yes , people with epilepsy can get life insurance . If you have not had a seizure in the past 2-5 years , you may even be able to get standard rate , depending on the type of epilepsy you have . If you are looking for a policy of $ 50,000 or less , you would probably be better off using a simplified issue policy -LRB- one that does not need an exam -RRB- . If you are looking for a policy of $ 100,000 or more , then you will probably want to try to get a medically underwritten policy , which will require better control of your epilepsy , but also will take into account some variables that a simplified issue policy may simply reject . Contact an agency that specializes in impaired risk , so that you can shop among carriers that are good for persons with health conditions . Epilepsy does not have to make you uninsurable . You just have to look at the right place to find an affordable policy .
Yes . Epilepsy is a disorder of the brain and nervous system involving repeated random seizures that occur without warning . If you have been diagnosed with epilepsy and are trying to purchase life insurance , the severity of the disease can have an effect on the rates you pay . Life insurance companies will want to know a number of factors to make an accurate risk assessment including : 1 . What age were you diagnosed with epilepsy ? 2 . Do you have Grand Mal , Petite , or Focal seizures ? 3 . When was your most recent seizure ? How many have you had in the last year , 2 years , 5 years , etc. ? 4 . Have you ever been hospitalized for epilepsy ? 5 . Are you taking prescription medication to control symptoms ? 6 . Are you a smoker or tobacco user ? 7 . What is your height/weight ? 8 . Any other co-morbid conditions such as diabetes , obesity , heart disease , etc ? If you have been diagnosed with epilepsy , you should NOT apply with multiple companies at the same time - this can work against you as it will act as a sort of red flag for the insurance companies -LRB- they will see that you 've applied for multiple carriers and what the outcomes were during the MIB check -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- -RRB- . The more companies that give you a table rating or decline coverage on a formal application , the less likely you are to get a better offer . I highly recommend consulting with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your medical profile informally . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you need any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you are able to work and live a normal life with your epilepsy , you can usually get a medically underwritten policy rated Standard or better . If you have had any seizures in the past year , or if you have a history of serious or frequent seizures , you may need to get a simplified issue policy . In any event , there is usually a policy for persons with epilepsy . You may have to shop around to find an agent who understands epileptic life insurance so that you can get your best possible . price .
Yes , and for any major medical policies issued on or after January 1 , 2014 a person with Epilepsy would have their condition covered immediately with no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods allowed . It is possible that persons who still have older individual health insurance policies in effect could have been issuedwith a policy riderthat excluded coverage for Epilepsy as a condition of issuing the policy . Certainly any such person would have wanted to dump that old policy and enroll in a new one during the recently completed open enrollment period . If yousomehow missed that then you will almost certainly want to make the move during the open enrollment later this year for a January 1 , 2015 effective date .
In generally terms , the answer is yes if you fit the underwriting profile in relation to the form of epilepsy , the medication and frequency of occurrences . Identifying the form of epilepsy is a good beginning in the underwriting discovery process : Idiopathic , Grand Mal , Petit Mal , Symptomatic and Focal .
You can get health insurance with epilepsy . As an experienced health insurance broker -LRB- 33 years -RRB- , this is one of the conditions we often see when helping consumers shop for affordable healthcare . Under the ACA -LRB- Affordable Care Act -RRB- , pre-existing conditions are covered and there is no waiting period . Also , you may qualify for a federal subsidy to help pay premiums -LRB- during Open Enrollment -RRB- . Deductibles and coinsurance , however , will impact your out of pocket expenses .
Generally individuals with epilepsy or seizure disorder can obtain life insurance assuming they do not have other conditions that would lead to a decline of coverage . Most good independent agents with have access to multiple carriers that will offer coverage . There are questionnaires available that will give the underwriter a more complete picture of your illness and that will allow the agent to shop your case for the best result .
As of Jan. 1 , 2013 , Medicare does cover benzodiazepines . Xanax , Klonopin , Ativan and their generics are now covered by Part D Medicare for all medical conditions for which they are deemed medically necessary . Barbituates have also been added , but only for epilepsy , certain cancers , and certain medical conditions . Check your own Medicare Part D formulary to see which benzodiazepines are covered .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Why get whole life insurance ? I ca n't give you a reason why you should , only why I did . I wanted a locked in price the day I bought it , till the day I died . I wanted something to work both if I died too early or lived too long . I wanted something I owned , that could not be taken away later on . I wanted to control the policy , not the insurance company . I wanted to take away an insurance company 's ability to say no to me . I wanted a safe place to put money to let it grow , to cover for my other investment choices . I wanted a place to access cash if needed , where I did n't have to explain to a guy in a cubicle `` why ? '' and get his blessing . If any of these reasons work for you , by all means consider the choice .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Does Health Insurance Protect You From ?
In the most basic terms health insurance protects you from large medical claims that would or could destroy your finances . Most policies are written with protection that limits the insureds maximum risk during a plan year . Health insurance protects you from financial loss by assuming a large portion of the risk in trade for premium .
Health insurance does not protect you from getting sick or injured in an accident . People buy health insurance for different reasons , but the main reason is for financial protection . Small claims , such as routine doctor bills and most maintenance drugs can be paid out of pocket . There is no reason to buy a policy for routine expenses . The more important reason for buying a major medical plan is to cover large medical claims , the kind that could cause financial ruin . In evaluating major medical policies make sure you understand the way the plan works , paying particular interest to the deductible and out of pocket limits . You should also buy a plan that covers all brand name drugs , not just generics .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
How does health insurance work while on disability ? Since I just ended 12 months of disability that included many hospitalizations and treatments , I can tell you it works exactly the same as not being disabled . Disability insurance protects your income , health insurance protects your health . You can have both going on at once . Depending on your employment situation , how your health insurance is paid for may make a difference . Maybe your employer continues to pick it up , maybe it 's covered under workman 's comp , maybe you pay your own premiums . . the main thing is health insurance does n't go away if you 're collecting disability insurance .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
When youre asking what insurance do you need when you retire , we need to know if youre asking about Health Insurance or are you talking about protecting your family from loss . If your question pertains to your health insurance because most of us loose that when we retire then you have two options . You can look at either a Medicare Supplement , which works similar to car insurance and what I mean by that is you can buy a plan with no deductible and pay a higher premium , that will cover all of your doctor and hospital expenses or you can assume part of the risk and pay a lower monthly premium with a deductible or co-pay and it will still cover your doctor and hospital expenses . Medicare Supplement will run you anywhere from $ 155 to $ 200 per month so around 2-3 thousand dollar per year to see your doctor 4 to 5 times a year . Some people like this option because their monthly cost is set even when they have a bad health year . The other option you have is to look at a Medicare Advantage plan if its available in your area . Most plans have either low or no monthly premium and small co-pays when you see your doctor or are hospitalized . All plans have a maximum out of pocket to protect you for bad health years so if youre like the average senior and you see your doctor the 4-5 times a year , your health insurance cost will run you under $ 100 . If you were asking about insurance to protect your family from loss then the answer get more complicated because we have to look at what insurance you already have in place , if you have a pension are you looking at taking a full or partial , do you have a 401K , if married when is your spouse going to retire and if it would be better to take their social security now or wait . With out knowing the answers to some of those questions answering that question would just be a blind shot in the dark .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
Title insurance is not homeowners insurance . Title insurance is what a Title company will take out to protect you and the Title companyin-casethe Title is not clean . Here is an example . You buy a house from John Doe . The Title company does there job and sees John Doe is the only owner and the sale and transfer of title is clean . However John had asisternamed Jane Doe that no one knew about who was also on title of the home and did not approve of the sale . What now ??? This is where title insurance would come in . Title Insurance would pay for any potential loss due to abotchedup deal . Usually the title insurance would pay off Jane to complete the sale since it was already finalized but there are several different ways this could go . I hope this helps to give you an idea of how title insurance works .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
The purpose of insurance , in general , is to provide economic protection against losses that may be incurred due to a chance happening or event . An insurance policy provides this protection by accumulating funds to meet those uncertain losses . Human life value , which is what Life insurance protects , is what a person would earn , or what it would cost to replace the services of that person , in the future . The primary purpose of life insurance is to conserve and protect human life value so that others will not be too negatively affected economically in the event of the insured person 's death .
Accidental Life Insurance does just what it sounds like . It protects you ONLY from accidents . Meaning if you die from an accident , your beneficiaries will recover . However , if you die of natural causes , it will not pay . Is that what you really want ? What are the odds of dying only from an accident , versus from natural causes ? I would urge you to consider a normal life insurance policy , which will pay your loved ones , regardless of the cause of your death . Thank you . GARY LANE .
This is a bit more complicated than just considering when you should purchase LTC . Sure , the younger you are the less expensive it will be . Many companies are getting out of the business due to reserve requirements along with claim history . The question I tell people to consider is how to get the protection you need while getting the most value from the premium you are looking at spending . Example : Did you know that you could have Critical & Chronic Illness protection within your term life insurance or permanent policy ? Consider , you get the death benefit of course when you die but what happens leading up to this ... you are surviving a medical event that could financially devistate your family . Where will you get the funds to support the family , medical expenses , etc. ? How about from your Life Insurance policy . Instead of just getting one benefit , you can have access to 3 ... . Now that is what I call value . Please note that you accelerating the death benefit so when you die , the death benefit may be reduced . With some planning you can make sure you have the strategies to protect your family and their financial future . Long-Term care insurance is something that everyone is going to need sometime in their future . And there are several ways to get the protection you need . Be sure to look at all the options before signing up for any policy .
Great question ! In simple terms , the purpose of any kind of insurance is to protect you or others , from financial hardship as a result of a loss . In life insurance , that loss is obviously a death ; in health insurance , your health . Homeowners insurance is designed to protect you , your mortgage company , and your family from expenses that arise from the loss or damage to your home . Like the insurances mentioned above , it is essential to have to protect your financial stability . If you would like more help , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
I could tell you the Christmas story . About how a father or mother bought life insurance to protect their spouse and their children , if there were to be gone from them . About how the life insurance would protect their family from having to find a way to pay the mortgage or having to sell the house and move from the local school , or maybe mom having to get a new job . But the most important part about having life insurance is just knowing that your loved ones are protected should you no longer be with them . Finding the right agent to listen to you and find out what you need , and having the best company , one that pays claims quickly , will give you a sense of relief and satisfaction . That 's what having life insurance is all about . Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
I presume from your question that you must be a health care provider or supply some type of service and/or product that is reimbursable under health insurance plans . First , you need to determine the competitive environment for your product or service in your marketplace . If you have lots of competition your negotiating position will not be as strong -LRB- perhaps nonexistent -RRB- as if there is limited competition for your product or service in your marketplace . The insurance company will know the answer to this question from their perspective so you need to know the answer too before engaging in discussions with insurance carriers . Know what the absolute minimum is that you can accept as payment for your product or service . In today 's environment cost is the main driver in provider contracting , any insurance carrier is going to want the lowest possible cost from any provider/vendor they contract with . What they want to pay could well be below your cost of providing the service . You will have to make a business decision if such an arrangement would make business sense in the overall context of your total business model . What is your unique selling proposition ? What do you offer that a competitor or other product does not provide or provide as well ? Do you offer a qualitative advantage , a price advantage , or both ? They are going to ask you these questions and expect you to prove it so be prepared . Do research on the insurance carriers . Does your target market align with theirs ? If your focus is on infant care calling on an insurance carrier who is more focused on the senior marketplace is obviously a waste of everyone 's time . Even among health insurance carriers that from the outside seem to be competing for the same market segment you will find upon closer examination that they all have their areas of market strengths and weaknesses and marketplace segments they focus on . Some are more oriented towards individual and small group health insurance while others really shine in the large group space . Knowing this in advance and knowing what your capabilities are will allow you to focus on the prospective carriers best aligned with the marketplace that is also the best fit for your product or service . Once you have these basics understood you can begin contacting the various insurance carriers and ask to be put in touch with the department and/or person who handles the insurance carrier 's provider contracting and you can let the games begin .
An in-ground pool in and of itself does n't cause an increase in Homeowners ' premium , however , it does vastly increase your liability exposure . Here in Connecticut , local building departments have very specific requirements with respect to fencing around an in ground pool and the gate mechanisms as well . Gates must be self latching for exampla , and fencing needs to be a certain height . Check with your building department about those requirements . Next talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your Homeowners ' policy and specifically about the amount of Liability protection it provides . It would be smart to increase that protection within your Homeowners ' policy and to also talk about adding the extra protection of a Personal Umbrella Liability policy to your insurance plans . These are usually available in amounts of $ 1 million and up and are very reasonably priced for the added protection and peace of mind that they provide .
There are many factors that affect the policy premium pricing . Therefore , more questions than answers ... initially ... First of all , what State are we talking about , since rates vary greatly from State to State , not to mention significant regional variations within a State ? For one example , think of a coastal location exposure to wind vs. a dwelling located inland and not generally exposed to the same potential perils . Which one is going to present the highest chance of risk for wind damage losses ? This will definitely affect the premium . Additionally , one insurance company 's rates can vary greatly from those of another . Also , a few of the many other questions : What is the amount of intended insurance needed on the dwelling ? How old is the home ? What type of construction ? What type of fire protection and proximity to the dwelling ? What other types of protection devices and method of monitoring ? Any dangerous animal breeds ? Swimming pool ? You really need to talk to an agent about rates in your location . Ask for quotes from the strongest carriers . Ask particularly about their financial strengths and claims paying histories . Try to get carriers with A.M Best ratings of A or better , if at all possible . Additionally , many State Insurance Departments have consumer information for the public , relating to homeowner polices . Do some of your own ` on-line ' research , if possible . You can also ask other homeowners in your area about their carriers ' pricing and experiences with claims .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Felons Buy Life Insurance ?
Felons who are on probation or have had a felony within the past 2 + years can have a difficult time getting life insurance , other than guaranteed issue coverage . Even a felony within the past 10 years can prevent getting some simplified issue policies , although a medically underwritten policy will look at the details of the felony and approve or decline based on that . Contact an agency that carries a large variety of products to find the lowest price policy with a history of felony .
Generally yes unless they are incarcerated . Those who have a felony conviction on their legal record are not excluded from purchasing life insurance and generally life insurance companies do not ask about any felony convictions in a proposed insured 's history , nor do they ask about any misdemeanor convictions .
Whether or not a felon can buy life insurance depends on several factors , including the age of the felon , and how long ago the felony was committed . Felons who are on probation or have had a felony within the past 2 + years can get guaranteed issue coverage if they are at least age 40-50 . If the felony was longer ago , it may be possible to get a simplified issue or medically underwritten policy . Contact an agency like ours , that carries a large variety of products and knows the details of what each will take , to find the lowest price policy with a history of felony .
Can felons get life insurance ? Short answer : yes . However there are hurdles to clear . Some providers wo n't issue to a felon at all . Some will , but only after the felon has finished their parole . Generally it will be required that the felon has maintained employment for a minimum amount of time . And it can be a help if there are circumstances that show that the felon has most likely adopted a law abiding , low risk lifestyle .
Can felons get life insurance ? Yes . Even while incarcerated , felons can get guaranteed issue life insurance . Can felons keep life insurance ? That is another question . If it is a cash value policy and the felon is paying restitution , the money in the policy may be subject to that . That would be dependent on many factors , and impossible to answer here .
Whether or not a felon can buy life insurance depends on several factors , including the age of the felon , and how long ago the felony was committed . Felons who are on probation or have had a felony within the past 2 + years can get guaranteed issue coverage if they are at least age 40-50 . If the felony was longer ago , it may be possible to get a simplified issue or medically underwritten policy . Contact an agency like ours , that carries a large variety of products and knows the details of what each will take , to find the lowest price policy with a history of felony .
It is possible for felons to get Medicare . They must meet some certain conditions , such as a waiting period of 5-15 years before they can apply for Medicare benefits -LRB- the less serious the crime , the shorter the waiting period -RRB- . This can possibly be reduced by one year with a letter from a probation officer , or it could be waived in the event of end stage renal failure . The felon can not be a fugitive or currently incarcerated .
Yes , a felon can get guaranteed issue life insurance if they fit the age guidelines and if the product is available in their state . Most guaranteed issue policies have a maximum face amount of $ 25,000 or less . If the felony has been in the past , and the felon is off of probation , it is possible to get more coverage .
A felon will probably be declined by a life insurance company for a period of time after their release . There are , however , companies that write policies with very limited underwriting and some that issue policies without any underwriting . These policies are more expensive and may have restrictions on the death benefit . They would provide an alternative for a felon .
Most life insurance companies will delay issue of a life insurance policy to a felon until some time after incarceration and/or probation have been served . Guaranteed life insurance policies do not have that requirement , and the guidelines for some products are definitely stricter than others . Contact an agency that sells multiple products , both medically underwritten and simplified issue , to find your best life insurance rates with a felony .
There are a lot of life insurance companies that will not allow felons to have life insurance . I am not aware of any carriers that would underwrite you while incarcerated . A felony with some carriers depends on the charges . I would highly recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best price and best product for your situation , it may be expensive .
A felon can but guaranteed issue life insurance if they meet the age requirements -LRB- usually a minimum age of 40-50 years old -RRB- . Most No Exam policies delay offering policies until after probation for a felony . If the felony is dismissed it is possible to get a medically underwritten life insurance policy without having to wait .
A felon can get guaranteed issue life insurance if they meet the age requirements -LRB- usually a minimum age of 40-50 years old -RRB- . Most No Exam policies delay offering policies until after probation for a felony . If the felony is dismissed it is possible to get a medically underwritten life insurance policy without having to wait .
It really depends on the company , but there are a number of parameters that can prevent a person from qualifying for life insurance . There are a number of insurers for example that will insure people up the the age of 90 ... not very many , but there are a few . Most will not insure people over the age of 80 no matter how good their health is . The mortality tables just place them at the high end of risk for death and therefore not a good investment for the insurance company . Most health conditions are not complete blocks to getting insurance , but may well be rated and therefore require a higher premium . Most insurers will not insure a convicted felon until they have fulfilled their parole requirements . Even then some companies will not take the risk . If a person 's occupation and or avocation is considered too high a risk , that may cause some insurance companies to decline issuing a policy .
Felons who are on probation or have had a felony within the past 2 + years can have a difficult time getting life insurance , other than guaranteed issue coverage . Even a felony within the past 10 years can prevent getting some simplified issue policies , although a medically underwritten policy will look at the details of the felony and approve or decline based on that . Contact an agency that carries a large variety of products to find the lowest price policy with a history of felony .
Felons can possibly receive Medicare after a waiting period of 5 to 15 years , depending on the severity of the crime that they had committed . They must also meet age requirements and have contributed to Medicare through their job for at least 40 quarters , as does anyone who applies for Medicare .
As a 24 year felon , the answer is maybe although unlikely . What is the nature of the felony ? How long are you on probationary status ? It may be possible to get you some accidental coverage which then could convert to a permanent policy at a later date . It really will depend on the details leading to the felony . This is a tricky case however I am open to seeing what I can do if you would provide me more detail .
Convicted felons may be able to get Medicare if they are not fleeing from the government and have waited through a waiting period of 5 to 15 years -LRB- the requirement varies from state to state and is based upon the severity of the crime -RRB- . Of course , they must meet age and work guidelines .
Good question ! The answer is yes , they can . However , the policy that they would be able to purchase would certainly come with more restrictions than one that a non-felon would be able to purchase . It would be more expensive , and have a period of time that would have to be covered before it would pay out anything more than what you paid into it to that point , plus some interest . If you would like a little more detail , please hit the contact me button , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Most felons can get life insurance . They type of policy and the premiums they will pay will depend on when the felony was committed , whether the felon is still on parole , and even the age of the person who committed the felony . You need to contact an impaired risk agent who can shop multiple carriers for you to find coverage at the lowest possible price .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Many People Go Without Health Insurance ?
I think the real answer to your question is that no one knows for sure . Prior to the conclusion of the recent open enrollment period estimates ranged from somewhere in the 30 million to as high as 48 million Americans being uninsured . Certainly the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- has made some dent in this number but firm figures are difficult to obtain at this time -LRB- late April 2014 -RRB- and even the figures reported are subject to debate . If the goal of the Affordable Care Act was to eliminate Americans being uninsuredthen even the most optimistic enrollment figures of 10 million -LRB- when you include Medicaid expansion and young persons being able to stay on their parents policies until age 26 -RRB- show that we have fallen far short of eliminating the problem . And , some analysts do make the mistake of confusing enrollment with becoming insured and maintaining insurance coverage . Generally there is a 15 % to 20 % attrition rate in the individual marketplace for people who enroll but either fail to make their initial premium payment or discontinue paying -LRB- and thus their coverage -RRB- after a few months . There is little reason to think that the law will change human nature so the net impact on the number of uninsured Americans will probably be further diluted as the year progresses . When one takes into account that many enrollees being counted were previously insured under plans no longer compliant with the law 's requirements you have a fairly large amount of the enrollment really just being a transfer from one insured status to another . The end result is that there are fewer uninsured Americans today than there were a year ago but that number has not been reduced dramatically .
Once upon a time there was a very rich man . He owned a number of businesses which he had started himself and which he had built himself . Altogether , he employed close to 20,000 people . That means he created opportunities for 20,000 people to support their families and lead their own lives . He understood that he could never have built his business empire without the dedication , hard work , and loyalty of each and every one of those men and women . He took good care of them . He paid them well . Lots of bonuses , lots of benefits . He was very community-minded . He knew that no man , and no family , was an island unto itself . We need each other . We need each other in times of natural disasters , and human tragedy , and family distress . When people lose their job , or get sick , or maybe lose their home , they need a helping hand . He always made sure his hand was ready to give . He took it upon himself to help many , many people . He gave generously to community service organizations . He made sure that families who were suffering had the means to weather the storm and remain together . When people in need came to him , he helped them get back on to their own two feet . He was an extremely dedicated family man . He loved his wife dearly . He was always there for his children . Everything he did was really for them . He wanted them to have the best of everything . He especially wanted his son and daughter to have a great jump-start in life . His entire estate the houses , the businesses , the valuables - was going to go to them when he passed away . One day he had a lunch meeting with his friend who was an estate planning attorney . His friend made the following observation : You know , you are quite a person . You have done such a tremendous job building a life for yourself . All the people you employ , all the people you help . How fortunate your family is to have you as a provider . But heres the problem : God forbid you die tomorrow , this entire wonderful world you have built collapses . Without you and your broad shoulders , the entire enterprise stops in its tracks . You can imagine that our friend the Rich Man didnt like hearing that at all . He had indeed put so much of himself into what he held to be precious . It would almost be an act of betrayal for them to lose it all when he died . I mean , shouldnt he make provisions for their care after his death ? Why shouldnt the show go on ? So many people have become dependent on him . So , he bought a bunch of life insurance . Life insurance to make sure his family wouldnt have to sell half his assets just to pay the governments estate tax bill . They wouldnt have to sell the residences or family jewels . The heirlooms could stay in the family . He bought life insurance to enable his businesses to keep running . People would be able to keep their jobs . Vendors would get paid . Clients would receive service . The management team would have enough money to keep going and growing . He bought life insurance to fill the coffers of charities doing noble work in his community . Hungry people could get fed . Homeless people could get shelter . Unemployed people get retrained for new jobs . Life insurance made it possible for the great work this man had been doing to continue . And because life insurance is such a great deal financially , the cost of this planning was literally pennies on the dollar . Each dollar of life insurance benefit literally cost him a few cents . Of course , it was this financial wisdom and eagerness to take advantage of a great deal that made him rich in the first place :-RRB- Would you like to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Lets suppose you own a business . Obviously you cant do everything yourself , so you need to hire people with special skills . Collectively you can get to where you want to go . The people with special skills might include a high-ranking executive . Might also include a highly skilled technician . Perhaps a top salesman . All these people play roles that are key to the operation . And you , as the entrepreneur of the enterprise , are very much a key person too . This is not to say that people who are not key do not bring value to the company and are not important . If all the business needed was key people , why would you hire anybody else ? But key people are the ones whose loss would create the biggest problems . Sales could go down . Vendors might not get paid . Clients might get nervous about orders being filled . Banks might think twice about lending money . You need to protect your business against the loss of these people . If any or all of them disappeared tomorrow , you need to be sure that your business can go full speed ahead . Employees , clients , prospects , vendors , lenders , investors , and everyone else related to your business , need to be reassured that business will take place as usual . And that takes money . If you have the exact amount of money you need exactly when you need it , then you could tell people to not worry . Orders will get filled . Bills will get paid . You can take the time needed to find the right replacement . And you dont want to have to set up an investment program to cover these people . Nor do you want to have to borrow the money . You want this coverage to come as cheaply as possible without any hoops to jump through . That is what life insurance does when it is purchased for key person coverage .
You can buy most types of insurance without an agent . But it does n't save you any money . You pay the same . The agent is someone who understands a lot more about insurance than you do . He helps you avoid mistakes . When people are left to their own choices they make huge mistakes with insurance . In fact they tend to put huge importance on BRANDS of insurance rather than the specifics of their policy . That 's a huge mistake . You can buy without an agent . And I am an agent so I might be biased but if you show me 10-people who bought insurance without a good agent I can show you 10 - people that I can give much better choices to . The problem is most agents are less than 1-year on the job and only know a little more than you do . When you choose your agent the first thing you should ask is how long they have been a full time insurance agent . Over 5-years is good . Less than 2-years is real bad . Let them learn on other people . Also ask if the are independent or work mainly for one company . If they work mainly with one company , that 's not good unless you do n't care about price and value . Your agent is free for you . Interview several . Fire them if they do n't fit well with you . Use them to your benefit .
This is a very common question people ask and a good one at that . There are many great uses and protections that life insurance offers . The most common reasons why people buy life insurance are to pay off debts -LRB- e.g. a mortgage , cars , credit card debt , burial expenses , kids ' college educations , etc. -RRB- , estate planning , and/or income replacement in the event the insured dies . People also get life insurance for business purposes as well such as collateral for a business loan from a bank , key-man programs , and buy-sell agreements . The idea of life insurance is to create a ton of cash upon the death of the insured . You protect yourself/your family financially in the event of a catastrophic event by pooling the risk and shifting it to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . A great question to think about is `` if I died tomorrow , would my family be financially sound without my income ? '' - For the vast majority of people , the answer would be NO . Not only is determining whether you need life insurance important , but how much coverage do you need and for how long . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker to help you determine the appropriate benefit structure that 's going to be the most suitable for your needs and your budget and to help you secure it through the right carrier . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
You can purchase individual life insurance while pregnant . Most companies will not have a problem with the first two trimesters underwriting an individual who is pregnant and at that point experiencing a normal pregnancy without complications . The third trimester is a bit more dicey as most carriers at that point may wish to wait until after childbirth to underwrite . I have written and had issued life insurance for people up to the 7th month without any extra premium or restrictions by the insurance company . It is going to depend on the health of the person and how the pregnancy is going .
How important is disability insurance ? It 's going to depend on your situation . Since Disabiliyt Insurance is paycheck protection , the first thing you have to ask `` is my paycheck worth protecting with disability insurance ? '' Maybe you have passive income or considerable savings that may reduce the the need for disability coverage ? Maybe you are just shy of retirement ? I guess the importence of Disability Insurance to the individual is going to be in proportion to how long that person can go without a paycheck ? Answering that question usually establishes your waiting period for most people for the policy they are considering .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
There are three main types of life insurance and they have three different intended lengths . Whole-Life Insurance - Designed to stay in force until you die regardless of how long you live . Most people pay a premium on whole-life their entire lifetime but many will pay it in full within 10-years or 20-years . Some pay it with one single premium . Term Life Insurance - Term is a policy that you decide how long yopu want to keep it when you buy it . Most people buy it for either 1-years , 20-years or 30-years . If you try to keep term life insurance too long you will pay a LOT of money to keep it going in the later years . That is usually the result of bad planning . Universal Life -LRB- aka : Flexable Premium Life -RRB- - You COULD keep this policy going for as long as you live but the premium will usually go up a lot unless you die at a younger age . You can change the amount of premium you pay with these policies since they do not have a lifetime rate guarantee . Many people consider these to be time-bomb policies if they are not reviewed and adjusted regularly .
The purpose of health insurance is to protect yourself financially in the event of a catastrophic event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . This way you 're only paying a small amount of money and not stuck with a bill for 10s of thousands of dollars , if not 100s of thousands of dollars . Would you rather pay a small amount of the bill or take on the risk of paying the entire thing yourself ? For example , if you have a health insurance plan and broke your leg and needed to have a $ 100,000 surgical operation , you may only be responsible for a few thousand dollars of it -LRB- e.g. your deductible or coinsurance -RRB- , as opposed to being responsible for paying the entire bill yourself . How many people could afford to write a check for that amount without liquidating all of their assets ? Many health plans will provide additional benefits as well , such as coverage for preventive care , routine doctor visits , prescription drugs , etc. . I always recommend people consult with an experienced broker - we have an in-depth knowledge of a wide range of products available in the marketplace and can help you find the health plan that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please let me know if I can be of assistance . Thanks very much .
The purpose of health insurance is to protect yourself financially in the event of a catastrophic event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . This way you 're only paying a small amount of money and not stuck with a bill for 10s of thousands of dollars , if not 100s of thousands of dollars . Would you rather pay a small amount of the bill or take on the risk of paying the entire thing yourself ? For example , if you have a health insurance plan and broke your leg and needed to have a $ 100,000 surgicaloperation , you may only be responsible for a few thousand dollars of it -LRB- e.g. yourdeductible or coinsurance -RRB- , as opposed to being responsible for paying the entire bill yourself . How many people could afford to write a check for that amount without liquidating all of their assets ? Many health plans will provide additional benefits as well , such as coverage for preventive care , routine doctor visits , prescription drugs , etc. . I always recommend people consult with an experienced broker - we have an in-depth knowledge of a wide range of products available in the marketplace and can help you find the health plan that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please let me know if I can be of assistance . Thanks very much .
For many reasons . The most common reasons why people buy life insurance are to pay off a mortgage , cars , credit card debt , burial expenses , kids ' college educations , and/or income replacement in the event the insured dies . A great question to ask yourself is `` if I died tomorrow , would my family be financially sound without my income ? '' - For the vast majority of people , the answer would be NO . Not only is determining whether you need life insurance important , but how much coverage do you need and for how long . An insurance agent/broker can help you determine this figure . People also get life insurance for business purposes as well such as collateral for a business loan from a bank , key-man programs , and buy-sell agreements .
If you were injured in an accident or had a debilitating illness that prevented you from working , how long can you go without a paycheck ? How will you pay your bills ? How will you pay for your health insurance ? Most people do not have enough in savings to pay the bills in the event of an extended illness . If they do , chances are it will come at the expense of the kids college fund or retirement savings .
If you have to choose between buying short or long term disability insurance , most people select long term disability insurance . That is because most people can survive a few months of not having an income , but it is difficult for most people to go without their paycheck for many months or years . If you are trying to decide whether to buy any disability insurance at all , it depends on your income -LRB- whether your family depends on it -RRB- , your health and occupation -LRB- whether you qualify for a policy -RRB- , and the cost of the policy -LRB- whether you can afford it -RRB- . If you are living on minimum wage , buying long term disability insurance is not going to fit in your budget . If you are the breadwinner in your family , do n't have a large amount of savings , and have a moderate to good standard of living , it is almost essential to do long term disability insurance .
If you live in Tennessee , Arkansas or Mississippi give me a call or e-mail me and I 'll help you out . This is becoming a mantra with me so here it goes - seek out an experienced health insurance agent and have them review your situation and your options both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplaces . Of course , you can go to some online web sites and there 's always HealthCare.gov that is supposed to make purchasing health insurance so simple . However , ObamaCare , whether you love it or hate it , has done many things but making understanding what you are buying simpler for the average consumer is not one of them . There are many , many fine points regarding provider networks , how the consumer can access care , how different health care services are covered from one product to another , what prescription drugs are covered and how , that even when they are technically explained on a web site the consumer either does n't understand the terminology or just rushes past these important factors while focusing on a few bullet points and the monthly premium . I 've met entirely too many people this year who have come to regret the purchasing decision they made on their own and only learned the consequences of once they needed to use their coverage . So , do n't be that person . It does n't cost you anymore to use the services of a health insurance agent and you are making a decision that could literally have major implications for your personal and financial well being . Why would n't you seek out professional advice ?
Of course you can , it 's called paying for it yourself . And actually that 's how most Americans paid for their health care -LRB- such as it was -RRB- for most of our nation 's history . Of course today most Americans have grown up in an environment where all of their health care financing has been funneled through a third party such as a health insurance company or a government program and have been disconnected from the concept of directly paying for health care services . Many would argue this is one of the underlying causes of the problems our nation is experiencing with health care costs today . Your doctor would be thrilled to be paid in cash , check or credit card for your office visit and not have to file a claim with an insurance carrier or government agency . In fact , you might find out you would get a discounted charge for paying in cash . An example of this is the growing `` concierge medical practice '' movement where people prepay their physician a fee for access to the doctor 's services . You get your phone calls returned promptly and when you go in to see your doctor he actually spends more than 5 to 10-minutes with you . What a revolutionary idea ! The hospital ca n't turn you away when you have an emergency and must deliver care . However , this does n't relieve you of the financial responsibility for the services you receive and they will bill you and pursue payment . This is obviously the area where the greatest concern for individual health financial risk management comes up . Unless you are very wealthy , self-financing several years of cancer treatment or paying for a heart transplant is out of the question for most people . Even managing a chronic health problem like diabetes , COPD , or psoriatic arthritis can have the person using medications costing hundreds or thousands of dollars per month . So , yes , you can still get medical treatment without health insurance and for many routine health care needs self-financing would probably be more cost effective . However , for the high risk and chronic health conditions a person may be faced with insurance is really a necessity .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What 's The Difference Between Whole Life Insurance And Endowment Insurance ?
Actually whole life is a type of endowment . An endowment policy is a policy designed with the cash value equaling the face amount at a given age or after a set number of years . A whole life policy is an Endowment at age 100 . Other examples are endowment at 65 , 20 year endowment , etc. . In Canada , if the cash value of a policy exceeds that of an endowment at age 85 , then the policy is non-exempt and is subject to accrual taxation . Consequently , endowments are not usually available . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There are three categories of life insurance : Ordinary Insurance , Industrial Insurance , and Group Insurance . When you go to purchase a policy , you are looking for Ordinary Insurance , and it comes in the following types : 1 -RRB- Term Life Insurance This comes in Level term , Increasing Term , and Decreasing Term . But almost all policies sold now are level term , which stay at the same face amount for the full amount of the term . Term Life is temporary coverage that expires at the end of a certain number of years , unless one is able/chooses to renew or convert them . They do not usually have any cash value and if will lapse if premiums get more than a month behind . 2 -RRB- Whole Life Insurance Comes in Straight Whole Life , Limited Pay Whole Life , and Single Premium Whole Life , named after how long one pays the premiums -LRB- the shorter the years one pays the premium , the higher the premium -RRB- . There are also a number of other forms of Whole Life that differ by other features than how long the premium is paid . Whole Life is permanent , stays in effect for one 's `` whole life '' . Has cash value that can be borrowed against or used to pay premiums . If dropped after a certain length of time will have a cash surrender value or can become a reduced paid up policy . 3 -RRB- Endowment Policies Cash values grow rapidly so that the policy endows at maturity and the face amount can be collected , even if still alive . 4 -RRB- Nontraditional Life Insurance Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Interest Sensitive Whole Life , and variable products belong in this category . They all have features that make them different from one another , but all have the ability to provide permanent coverage and have cash value .
Actually whole life is a type of endowment . An endowment policy is a policy designed with the cash value equaling the face amount at a given age or after a set number of years . A whole life policy is an Endowment at age 100 . Other examples are endowment at 65 , 20 year endowment , etc. . In Canada , if the cash value of a policy exceeds that of an endowment at age 85 , then the policy is non-exempt and is subject to accrual taxation . Consequently , endowments are not usually available . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Endowment plans are designed to really push the cash accumulation inside your policy . Why would you want to do that ? I mean after all , the purpose of life insurance is to provide the survivor benefit you need , when it is needed , for the best price available . Each dollar of benefit literally costs pennies . It is a great deal . So how does cash fit into this picture ? It can be superb icing on the cake . Solid whole life products provide great guarantees on the cash accumulation . Solid whole life companies provide some hefty dividends on a non-guaranteed basics . Universal life can provide not only attractive cash accumulation , but some pretty interesting distribution options . And according to current tax law , all this money can be available with little or no taxation . -LRB- Ask your attorney if you dont believe me -RRB- . BUT certain rules have to be followed if you want to keep Uncle Sam out of the picture . An endowment contract could very well trigger a taxable event . When a policy endows , it could exceed the threshold of growth that the government authorities allow before they tax you . A pretty good sign this has occurred is when the cash value equals the death benefit . Is this necessarily bad ? It doesnt have to be . If you get the proper advice from your broker and your tax advisor , this could be a planned event in which you still benefit . Even considering the tax you will have to pay , you could still be way ahead of the game financially . However , if you really want to avoid a taxable event , your insurance company will help you . They really dont want to be sued by you or anybody else who mistakenly gets a tax bill you dont want to pay . They will give you illustrations to your hearts delight with all kinds of red flags screaming endowment ! endowment ! endowment ! You can then plan accordingly . To endow , or not to endow . That is the question :-RRB-
Endowments are a form of life insurance . Actually most permanent life insurance policies are endowment policies . For example , a whole life policy is actually an endowment at age 100 , or 120 depending upon the insurance company . That means when you reach age 100 or 120 the cash surrender value of the policy will equal the face amount . That is what an endowment policy is . Endowment policies were very popular at one time and I have written policies that endowed in ten years .
An Endowment Plan , is a life insurance policy that is designed so that the guaranteed cash value equals the face amount of the policy at a specified age or time . A whole life policy is for example an Endowment at age 100 , since that is when the guaranteed cash value equals the face amount . 20 year Endowments and Endowments at ages 65 and 70 used to be quite popular savings vehicles . In Canada , the government legislated the maximum cash value to death benefit ratio permitted needed to keep the policy exempt from accrual taxation to that of Endowment at age 85 . The result being that insurance companies do not issue those Endowments anymore . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Endowment is the basic form of permanent insurance . In contrast with term insurance which provides protection for a specified period of time , an Endowment will pay a death benefit when the insured dies if premiums are paid . A `` whole life '' policy is an endowment policy with the endowment occurring beyond normal life expectancy . Endowment policies were quite poplular one hundered years ago when life expectancy was lower .
A life insurance policy endows when the guaranteed cash value equals the initial face amount . The typical policy may endow at age 100 or for policies using the latest mortality table , they may endow at age 121 . Bear in mind that a life insurance policy 's premium schedule may differ from the endowment year . In other words , a policy may have a premium paying period of 10 or 20 years or age 65 yet the endowment will still be later .
A life endowment policy is a policy that guarantees that the guaranteed cash value will equal the face amount of the policy at at specified time . A whole life policy is an Endowment at 100 . Another example a $ 100,000 Endowment at age 65 plan would have a guaranteed cash value at age 65 of $ 100,000 plus any accumulated dividends . They were once quite popular , because of the guarantees and tax advantaged growth . New product advancements and changing tax laws have caused few -LRB- if any -RRB- companies to even issue them . -LRB- In Canada at least -RRB- . The notable exception are Whole Life policies which endow at age 100 -LRB- The face amount equals the guaranteed cash value -RRB- If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Only term life insurance expires . Whole life and universal life actually endows . It depends on how the agent sets the policy up at point of application , but the premiums are based on minimum , target and maximum premiums . The illustrations will show the age that was targeted for the coverage to endow . The most common ages are 95 , 100 , 105 and 121 years old . The whole life policy will endow at the specified age which means the premiums will begin to exceed the death benefit . At this point , you can take the cash value , you can continue paying premiums to allow the cash value to grow or you can stop paying premiums and allow the money to grow and leave your beneficiary the cash as a death benefit . Whole life insurance will not just simply expire .
That is an excellent question ! They are like wheat and white bread - both bread , but different kinds , and with different benefits for you . A whole life policy will generate a cash value slowly , and generally reach the point where the face value and the cash value match -LRB- or endow -RRB- at the age of 100 , or 120 in most policies . Most people will receive their death benefit before the policy would endow . An endowment policy/contract is designed to endow much more quickly - generally in either a 20 year period , or at the age of 65 . The premiums therefore are much higher than a traditional life policy . The idea here is that if you were to pass within the first few years , you would receive a big payout for few dollars , but the flip side is that you would receive an almost even payout if you were to die later in the contract . So why do it ? These policies typically pay a higher interest rate on the cash value savings building up in them than the traditional , slower policies do , and that is about the only reason . They were popular once , but have faded as a rule from popularity . Thanks for asking !
Life insurance really does not mature . Permanent life insurance or cash value life insurance does not mature but they endow . These are the whole life and universal life policies that endow when the cash value equals the face amount . Term life insurance has no cash value and can not endow . Term life insurance either expires when the term is met or has a steep rate increase when the term is met .
Endowment plan , in the context of life insurance , can mean a few things . For example , when we design proposals for clients which involve flexible premium products such as universal life and its variations , we tend to solve for premiums based on conservative interest projections and aim at growing the cash value to `` endow '' at age 100 meaning we want the cash to grow to equal the initial death benefit purchased . Or we solve for maximum premium for a given death benefit to maximize cash values . Pure endowment policies are no longer offered in the US around 1980 due to tax code changes which declassified them as life insurance . In 1988 the term `` modified endowment contract '' was introduced into the code to further limit `` investment '' oriented life insurance . But the endowment concept is still alive and well when we design life insurance for maximum cash value accumulation within today 's limits .
Endow , in the context of life insurance , can mean a few things . For example , when we design proposals for clients which involve flexible premium products such as universal life and its variations , we tend to solve for premiums based on conservative interest projections and aim at growing the cash value to `` endow '' at age 100 meaning we want the cash to grow to equal the initial death benefit purchased . Pure endowment policies are no longer offered in the US due to tax code changes which declassified them as life insurance around 1980 . In 1988 the term `` modified endowment contract '' was introduced into the code to further limit `` investment '' oriented life insurance . But the endowment concept is still alive and well when we design life insurance for maximum cash value accumulation within today 's limits .
This is a great question and I appreciate the opportunity to offer some answers ! Whole Life Insurance has a lot of benefits ! For one it is highly customizable in the way it may be funded . It can be set up to be funded in as little as 11 annual payments , or paid for monthly over the life of the insured up to age 100 . Whole Life policies have a Guaranteed cash accumulation feature where a guaranteed interest is paid into a cash value portion of the policy , which then becomes a liquid asset accessible at the will of the owner of the policy . The interest -LRB- as well as dividends in participating policies -RRB- is paid into the cash value Tax-FREE . And a policy may be `` over-funded '' up to about 300 % , which of course will increase the tax-free interest growth rate . In a participating policy where dividends are paid in , the dividends may be used to purchase additional insurance . This increases not only the death benefit without ever taking another medical exam or even answering questions , but also increases the dividends paid ! Whole life insurance does not expire . It remains in force -LRB- as long as the premiums are paid up -RRB- until the insured dies , the owner decides to surrender the policy -LRB- for the cash value -RRB- , or the insured reaches the age of endowment . The age of endowment varies with the policy , but may be age 95 , 99 , 100 , or now days may be as high as age 121 . When that happens the entire value of the policy is handed over to the owner of the policy . Income tax free . When paid , the death benefit passes to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- income tax free . Another option available with Whole Life Insurance is the ability to use the cash value and then to take loans from the policy death benefit to supplement retirement income ! This can be set up to be paid out monthly , quarterly or annually ... and these payments are , again , Tax-free ! So to sum up , Whole Life Insurance does not expire regardless of the possible declining health of the insured and provides a death benefit to beneficiaries that is transferred tax-free . Whole Life grows Cash Value , Tax-Free , which is a liquid asset that may be used for any purpose the owner wishes , and may be accessed without incurring a taxable event by means of a policy loan . With participating policies the cash value can increase by means of guaranteed interest and dividends , which may be used to buy additional insurance with no medical requirements . The premiums are set at the beginning of the policy and are guaranteed not to increase for any reason . And the entire premium may be paid in as little as 11 annual payments , spread out over the lifetime of the insured , or set up to be paid over a 15 , 20 or 30 year period determined by the the owner of the policy . And Whole Life Insurance may be used to supplement retirement income as a tax-free cash stream .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A whole life policy provides a level death benefit for a level premium over the entire life of the individual . Most whole life policies actually endow and return the face amount at a given age . Whole life insurance provides the cheapest life insurance available for one reason . It is in force when death occurs . The percentage of claims paid on term policies is understandably quite low . The problem with whole life is that the premium required might cause a person to purchase less than an adequate amount of life insurance . A combination of whole life and term insurance can usually maximize coverage and minimize cost .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , you can do a Section 1035 exchange from a life insurance contract to an annuity , just not the other way around . Section 1035 permits the policy owner to trade certain kinds of contracts for another on a tax-free basis . The following types of exchanges are allowed under Section 1035 : Life contract for life contract Life contract for annuity contract Life contract for endowment contract Annuity contract for annuity contract Endowment contract for endowment contract Since 2010 , it is also possible to exchange a life , annuity , or endowment contract for a long-term care contract or exchange one long-term care contract for another long-term care contract .
Endowment life insurance is any life insurance contract with a guaranteed provision to endow . In the traditional sense , endow typically means that guaranteed cash value in the policy will one day equal the death benefit . So , after paying premiums over a certain period of time , the cash value accumulated in the policy will grow to equal the death benefit . In the mean time -LRB- prior to endowing -RRB- if the insured under the contract should die , the insurance company will pay the full death benefit to the beneficiaries .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Hurricanes
A renters policy provides coverage for damage that is the result of a covered peril . Since there is a wide variety of forms this can not be answered for every case , however , most policies list windstorm or hail right after fire and lightning . These are the fundamental coverages contained in most policies . The coverage has some limitations . The company will normally not pay for loss to property inside a structure , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water , all whether driven by wind or not , which enter through an opening not made by the direct force of wind or hail . The company is not likely to pay for the loss to watercraft and their trailers unless inside a fully enclosed building . Smaller water craft normally have coverage . If your property damage is subject to ordinance or law , such as a connection for an appliance , there might be a limitation on the increased cost of replacement that comes because of that law or ordinance . If the hurricane causes landslides or erosion , damage to your personal property arising from that movement of land might not be covered either . The same is true if the damage comes from flood water or tidal waves . This exclusion applies whether it is caused by wind or not . If the hurricane interrupts power supply the insurance company probably will deny coverage on any loss that result from that cause , for example rotting food in a freezer . If you are running a business out of your apartment , the company will probably exclude any loss that comes from that business to include interruption because there isnt power or people can not reach your apartment . The chances are quite good that if a hurricane strikes your apartment , that your renters policy will replace your property up to the limits of the policy . This is when you find out how good your coverage is . If you have appropriate limits you could be fully restored , minus the deductible . It is very important to have the correct limits for coverage on your renters policy . To make sure that you have adequate coverage take a picture of everything that you own inside your apartment . Then make a chart showing the property and the estimated cost of replacing the property . When you add up that list you will have the amount of coverage you should set as a limit for your policy . The pictures and estimates should be stored off-site in case that hurricane becomes a reality . Hurricanes often result in a loss of life . While that might seem remote , this might be a good time to consider what will happen to those that you leave behind . A quick inventory of debts would be a good thing to have handy . If you can eliminate debts and pay for final expenses you would be a great help to those that you love . Every weekend we see people on street corners seeking donations or offering car wash services so they can pay the expenses for a loved one . It is sad but it can be avoided with just a small amount of planning .
A renters policy provides coverage for damage that is the result of a covered peril . Since there is a wide variety of forms this can not be answered for every case , however , most policies list windstorm or hail right after fire and lightning . These are the fundamental coverages contained in most policies . The coverage has some limitations . The company will normally not pay for loss to property inside a structure , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water , all whether driven by wind or not , which enter through an opening not made by the direct force of wind or hail . The company is not likely to pay for the loss to watercraft and their trailers unless inside a fully enclosed building . Smaller water craft normally have coverage . If your property damage is subject to ordinance or law , such as a connection for an appliance , there might be a limitation on the increased cost of replacement that comes because of that law or ordinance . If the hurricane causes landslides or erosion , damage to your personal property arising from that movement of land might not be covered either . The same is true if the damage comes from flood water or tidal waves . This exclusion applies whether it is caused by wind or not . If the hurricane interrupts power supply the insurance company probably will deny coverage on any loss that result from that cause , for example rotting food in a freezer . If you are running a business out of your apartment , the company will probably exclude any loss that comes from that business to include interruption because there isnt power or people can not reach your apartment . The chances are quite good that if a hurricane strikes your apartment , that your renters policy will replace your property up to the limits of the policy . This is when you find out how good your coverage is . If you have appropriate limits you could be fully restored , minus the deductible . It is very important to have the correct limits for coverage on your renters policy . To make sure that you have adequate coverage take a picture of everything that you own inside your apartment . Then make a chart showing the property and the estimated cost of replacing the property . When you add up that list you will have the amount of coverage you should set as a limit for your policy . The pictures and estimates should be stored off-site in case that hurricane becomes a reality . Hurricanes often result in a loss of life . While that might seem remote , this might be a good time to consider what will happen to those that you leave behind . A quick inventory of debts would be a good thing to have handy . If you can eliminate debts and pay for final expenses you would be a great help to those that you love . Every weekend we see people on street corners seeking donations or offering car wash services so they can pay the expenses for a loved one . It is sad but it can be avoided with just a small amount of planning .
Primarily renter 's insurance is designed to protect your personal belongings that you have in your home that you rent . Renter 's insurance may replace items that are stolen from your home , or are damaged or destroyed by fire or flooding . You need to inquire with your insurance agent as to exactly what kinds of incidents are covered by any particular policy . For example in areas that are prone to hurricanes or tornadoes you may need to buy a rider in addition to the basic renter 's insurance , or you may need to buy hurricane insurance specifically .
Unless it is specifically excluded in your policy , any renters policy , not just Geico , will cover damage caused by hurricane or any other peril.Check with your agent to be sure of your particular policy but I am not aware of any company that excludes hurricanes or damage caused by hurricanes .
The property coverage you are afforded under renter 's coverage is for your personal property -LRB- furniture , tv , audio systems , clothes , dishes , etc -RRB- , but typically not for the building . If you are asking if your own personal property would be covered if a hurricane caused the damaged , then , yes , your personal property would be covered . However , there is one caveat ... if it was wind that was determined as the cause of loss . Hurricanes can cause damage not only by wind , but by flooding . If flooding -LRB- waters rising from outside -RRB- was the cause of loss , you may not be covered , because flood is typically excluded . You could possibly purchase flood coverage in this case .
It is possible that your Homeowners ' Insurance will cover loss due to hurricane , however , it is important that you discuss this directly with your Insurance Professional . In some areas , insurance companies may require higher deductibles for hurricane damage and others may exclude hurricane damage coverage all together . That is why it is important that you fully understand the terms and conditions of your particular policy .
Renters insurance will not cover earthquake or flood . A separate policy will be required if you are looking to insure those risks . Renters insurance depending on where you live may exclude or carry a different deductible for wind . Wind would include a hurricane . Lava flow would be excluded as well . A big Forest fire would be covered if you wish to consider this a natural disaster .
USAA homeowner 's insurance covers hurricanes . Typically , hurricanes are considered wind damage and it is always a peril that is listed in your basic and comprehensive policies . However , resulting flood damage must be covered with a separate flood insurance policy which can be purchased through most brokers and agents . They can review the rates quite easily .
It is best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy . Different insurance companies may have different rules and rates filed with your state 's Insurance Department that may outline how they handle Hurricane damage . Some may cover it broadly , others may differentiate between hurricane and wind storm and still others may not cover it at all depending upon where you are located .
What you 're going to want is called a Renter 's policy . It is written on a homeowner 's policy platform , but gives no coverage for the physical property of the home . This type of policy provides coverage for your personal belongings as well as personal liability coverage for yourself . The hidden gem in a Renter 's policy is Loss of Use coverage . Loss of use provides coverage for your additional living expenses if you are not able to stay in your current rental due to a covered loss , such as fire or smoke damage , or hurricanes and tornadoes . The policy pays additional rental expense , transportation expense , and often times eating expenses due to the imposition of being without your original rental .
Hurricane damage is covered in most renter 's policies with exceptions and limitations . Damage to the landscape may have incidental coverage . Certain items of personal property -LRB- money , jewelry , silverware , guns , for example -RRB- are subject to limits in the policy . If the damage is sustained due to flood , waves or an overflow of water that enters through an opening in the house or even through the sewer , damages may not be covered . If the direct cause of loss is power interruption , damages may not be covered .
Generally speaking yes . Windstorm is covered by your homeowners policy , but maybe treated separately by your policy as well . For example if you live in a coastal area wind coverage may be excluded and you obtain what coverage is available through a pooling arrangement such as a wind pool . For Example if you live in Galveston Texas you might you need three policies where as an inland customer would only need one.In Galveston your wind policy might be through the Texas Wind Insurance Association , your regular homeowners policy in the private market -LRB- exclusive of wind -RRB- . You may also be required to have a flood policy -LRB- from the National Flood Insurance Program -RRB- because your insurer does not want to see you in a dilemma of having one group say the damage was caused by wind borne water and another saying it is flood coverage after the loss . To keep your understanding of what is necessary visit with your agent and discuss your personal situation . One other thing I should mention is that depending on where you live you may have a separate , hurricane deductible , wind and hail deductible , named storm deductible . These are often per cent deductibles and can mean a substantial out of pocket costs in the event of a windstorm . They are not exclusively used in hurricane prone areas . For example in Austin Texas you might have a $ 1000 deductible for most homeowners coverage -LRB- perils -RRB- , but 1 % wind and hail deductible even though Austin is over 200 miles to the Gulf .
some states have inordinate exposure to dangerous , even sever weather . The peninsula of Florida is exposed to tropical and hurricane conditions every year during the Atlantic hurricane season -LRB- June 1 to November 30 . -RRB- The history impact of these storms has devastating financial ramifications for personal property owners , resulting in higher home insurance premiums .
It depends on where you live and the type of policy you have . In certain states you have to purchase separate Wind/Hail coverage so hurricane coverage is not included . In Virginia , wind/hail coverage is included in most policies unless you live near the coast . Coastal policies typically excluded wind/hail coverage or they will have a separate deductible . For example , you may have a $ 1,000 standard deductible but a 1 % - 5 % named storm or hurricane deductible . A percentage deductible is a big difference so make sure you are aware of what your policy includes .
Typically , a Renters Insurance policy works the same way as any residential policy with respect to covered losses . For the most part , there are two loss causes that are excluded from coverage , namely Earth Movement and Flood . Coverage for Earth Movement may , in many cases , be endorsed onto the policy , but the only way to have coverage for flood damage is to have a Flood Insurance policy . It is important to discuss this with your Insurance Professional to see how your policy works . If you are renting a property in a coastal area , for example , there may be coverage limitations in your policy for damage caused by wind or hurricane .
You can make a claim for anything you 'd like . . whether its going to be covered is another story . Try and limit your claims to large catastrophic losses like a hurricane or a fire . Your policy will cover certain perils . I suggest your read through your policy and contact your agent with questions . Some policies are `` all risk '' and cover everything that is not excluded . Typical exclusions for a homeowners insurance policy are wear & tear , maintenance , intentional acts , flood & earthquake .
I can not speak to nation wide because I am not appointed with them , however , I can say that the comprehensive form -LRB- other than collision -RRB- does cover water damage from floods . There is a caveat : if you live in an area that is susceptible to hurricanes or floods frequently there might be a sub-limit or exclusion to flood damage . You will have to examine your policy to make sure you do have flood coverage under your comprehensive section if you live in such an area .
Short answer is yes it does . Wind is a normal covered peril in a standard Homeowners ' policy . Now , how the coverage is applied may vary a bit depending upon the location of your home . If you are located in a coastal community as opposed to inland , some Insurance Companies may require a higher deductible for wind damage coverage . Some consider it separately , others lump wind together with hurricane . It may also be handled differently in areas that are more subject to tornadoes . It is best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy .
State Farm offers home insurance in most US states , but may not beselling new policies inevery state . For example , due to the risk of catastrophic claims costs from hurricanes , State Farm does not sell new home insurance policies in Florida.Contacta local State Farm agent , and they can let you know if State Farm home insuranceis available in your state .
Oh , this is a great question ! This is one of those questions that really requires thatyou to look at your policy , and the way that it is worded . Many homeowners are in for a shock when they realize that water from the ground surge is n't covered , unless they have flood insurance , or a rider that includes it . Same with wind damage . Often , deductibles are higher when hurricane damage coverage is included , so that might give you an idea if it is covered in your policy . Get with your agent , and see . Depending upon where you live , and the company that you bought from , you may well be covered , but it never hurts to be certain , especially before you need to know . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can Health Insurance Charge More For Smokers ?
Health insurance absolutely can charge more for smokers . In fact , under Healthcare Reform , the ONLY things for which carriers can charge more are age , location and smoking . Smoking was going to be a 50 % increase . That 's HUGE rate increase , but it ought to give you an idea of the claims that occur as a result of smoking . However , just recently Health & Human services stated they ca n't figure out how to logistically charge more for smoking at this time , so for the 1st year of Healthcare Reform , they are NOT going to charge more for smoking , which could end up raising the rates for everyone else . So again , prior to Healthcare Reform you will pay an increase . But as of 1/1/14 , no rate increase - at least for the 1st year .
Health insurance absolutely can charge more for smokers . In fact , under Healthcare Reform , the ONLY things for which carriers can charge more are age , location and smoking . Smoking was going to be a 50 % increase . That 's HUGE rate increase , but it ought to give you an idea of the claims that occur as a result of smoking . However , just recently Health & Human services stated they ca n't figure out how to logistically charge more for smoking at this time , so for the 1st year of Healthcare Reform , they are NOT going to charge more for smoking , which could end up raising the rates for everyone else . So again , prior to Healthcare Reform you will pay an increase . But as of 1/1/14 , no rate increase - at least for the 1st year .
Yes , indeed they do . And the test is pretty reliable . Want to hear an interesting story ? A number of years ago I took an application from a client who disclosed that he did smoke cigarettes on a daily basis . So I quoted him smoker rates . He provided the lab specimens for the insurance exam and we all assumed they would show he was indeed a smoker . When the results came back , he had tested negative for nicotine even though he smoked every day ! Our assumption was he had a huge tolerance and it just didnt register in the lab . So , fair being fair , the underwriter gave him non-smoker rates ! And he paid about half as much as he would have as a smoker . Of course , smokers cant count on that always happening . They should expect to pay smoker rates . And most smokers hate paying that extra premium for that extra mortality risk . -LRB- And by the way - there is a huge amount of data to show that smoking does increase your mortality risk . Sorry . -RRB- So what should a smoker do ? Lie on the application ? I mean , who is really going to know if you say you dont smoke , and just go without cigarettes for a few weeks ? Your lab specimen should then come out clean , right ? Bad idea . Not good . Dont do it . That is insurance fraud , you know . You could jeopardize the claim getting paid . Besides which , this is not a game . Life insurance pricing has to accurately reflect the risk obligations taken on . If everybody scammed the system to get undercharged , then odds are the insurance carriers wouldnt have enough money to pay out benefit . Then everybodys beneficiaries would lose out . Not only that : there is something to be said for acting honorably , dont you think ? Your word should be your bond . What about postponing the purchase of the policy and waiting a year or two , so you can quit in the meantime and then qualify for non-smoker rates ? Well , okay , but who says youll be insurable at that point ? What if you come down with high blood pressure , high cholesterol , or high blood sugar , or any number of things that could throw the rates off ? Or even worse , make you ineligible for coverage at all ? Delaying is not worth the risk . Best thing to do is buy the policy now for the best smoker rates available . Keep it in force . Then , stop smoking . If you qualify for non-smoker rates , go for it . If you are eligible for a better rate , then good for you . But if you are not , then at least you have coverage . Either way , your beneficiaries will get what they need . Good move .
Great question . Smokers usally pay more on life insurance about % 20 - % 50 more . Keep in mind not all companies have the same rates . Some companies charge more for smokers and some companies have good rates for that type of class . They will also ask how many do you smoke a day the less per day you migh get a preferred smoker rate .
Unfortunately , that is too broad a question to give a specific answer . I can however , point you in the right direction . Smoking status is just one factor in assessing risks and setting rates . Smokers usually will pay more than non-smokers . The reason for the word usually , as opposed to definitely , is that in Canada some companies approach smoking differently . In other words , they charge smokers different rates based on what and how much they smoke . For example , cigar smokers are generally permitted to smoke 1 cigar a month with many companies to still be considered `` non-smokers '' for insurance purposes . I suspect it is for purely competitive reasons for cigar-smoking golfers . However , a more realistic approach is allowing 50 cigars a year which some companies take . I suggest that you look at the online quoting services to get an idea and then work with a local independent agent / broker to get the right policy at the right price . It is very important that you are truthful when declaring your smoking status as the company can deny your claim if you are not . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The cost of life insurance for a smoker varies with age , gender and build , just as it does for life insurance for a nonsmoker . However , when you throw in a health condition , being a smoker can increase premiums much more than it does for a nonsmoker . Smoking while having diabetes , heart disease , COPD , even osteoporosis , can cause rates to jump exponentially , or even be declined . One way to get around this can be to purchase a simplified issue life insurance policy . Their smoker rates tend to not have quite as large a variation as medically underwritten policies , and they may not be as strict about the impact of smoking upon that health condition . There are also medically underwritten policies that treat smokers much better than others . Contact an agency that specializes in smoker life insurance to get your most competitive rate .
The cost of a long term disability policy will vary based on quite a few factors . Here are a few : 1 . The amount of monthly benefit you select . The higher the benefit , the higher the cost . 2 . Your specific occupation . The more hazardous your occupation , the more the insurance company will charge for the coverage . 3 . The riders you choose . Disability contracts have `` riders '' which are additional options and features that can be added to your policy . An example would be Future Purchase Option -LRB- FPO -RRB- which is the ability to buy more benefit as your income goes up without having to through medical underwriting . 4 . Your age and health . Disability insurance is more expensive the older you are . If you have health concerns , a disability carrier could charge an additional amount or decide to exclude a specific health issue in your policy . 5 . Tobacco usage . Smokers pay a higher premium .
Since life insurance rates will depend on several factors such as face amount , type of policy , your overall health and insurability profile , etc , the real question is how much MORE does life insurance cost for a smoker . Most companies differentiate between different types of tobacco use . An occasional cigar smoker may get a better rate than a cigarette smoker . A cigarette smoker could expect to pay 30 % to 50 % more in premiums depending on their age than a non-tabacco user .
This will depend on a number of factors , but for a given age , gender , and risk class - the premiums for a smoker will be roughly about 50 % more than non-smoker rates -LRB- can be higher , varies by carrier -RRB- . Some carriers may offer non-smoker rates to tobacco users depending on the type of tobacco and frequency of usage . The types of tobacco that carriers may consider for non-smoker rates are cigars , pipe smokers , and chewing tobacco - if you 're using cigarettes , you 're going to get smoker rates . To get a realistic projection of cost , you will want to review your height/weight and medical history with an independent agent to identify the risk class you 're most likely to qualify for -LRB- this determines the premiums for the program -RRB- , the age of the proposed insured -LRB- PI -RRB- , whether you 're male or female , a tobacco user or not , amount of coverage you want to secure/need , and how long you want to have the coverage in place for .
Usually , most policies require a quick medical exam , which includes a urine sample . And they will test for pot . The good news is that most companies will not decline you coverage . They will just consider you a `` Smoker '' and give you smoker rates . But , currently , I know of 3 companies that offer `` Non-Smoker '' rates to pot smokers . Aviva is the most relaxed about it . And will allow up to a `` Preferred '' non-smoker rating for using 2 times per week or less . Lincoln National is next and will give Standard Non-Smoker ratings to people who smoke 2 times per week or less . MetLife allows for 1 time per week and will offer a Standard nonsmoker rating . Prudential allows for 2 times per month , and offers a Standard nonsmoker rating . Long story short if you smoke Pot , Aviva or Lincoln National will be your best bets . And this list is as of 3/2013 , it could easily change .
There are more and more choices of life insurance for persons who smoke marijuana in a responsible fashion . Most companies will charge smoker rates , but some will rate as good as preferred smoker . Of course , even those companies can deny coverage if there have been recent driving violations due to marijuana use , or if you have had drug treatment and continue to smoke pot . Contact an impaired risk agency to find the most affordable life insurance rates with marijuana usage .
There are a lot of factors that go into the price of life insurance . Every year that you get older , the price increases for insurance . It also depends on how much life insurance you are looking for . The higher the death benefit , the higher the monthly premium . Another factor to consider is your health . Life insurance is based on the insurance companys risk . If you are unhealthy or have a few high risk health conditions , you will have to pay a higher rate for insurance . It is also up to the insurance company . Some insurance companies charge more for the exact same coverage . Also , women have a longer life expectancy then men so the rates for women are usually lower . There are two types of life insurance too . Term insurance only covers you for a period of time and whole life covers you for a lifetime and you are guaranteed a payout . Term is usually cheaper because if you dont pass in the specified term , the insurance company does not pay out anything . For policies that have a large death benefit , the insurance company usually asks for an exam to be done that checks your blood , heart rate , and other key health related factors . The rate is usually higher for smokers compared to non-smokers . Life insurance rates are determined on a case by case basis .
That varies by company and the amount of insurance applied for . I have seen as high as 10 % or more . Some companies are a little more lenient than others but most companies will rate smokers higher than non smokers due to the average increase in mortality risk . There are a couple companies that do not rate up for use of some tobacco products such as a pipe or chew , but I have found that many of these charge higher rates across the board .
Yes , if the life insurance company does any type of a paramed exam , they will test you for nicotine . Whether they use a cheek swab , blood draw or urine sample , this is one of the top items tested . Typically smoker rates are charged two and half to three times the premiums of a non-tobacco user as it is proven to shorten one 's life . Here is something to keep in mind . Underwriters test for cotine not nicotine . Nicotine can leave the body within a couple of days for an occasional smoker . Cotine stays in the body 's system for up to 14 days . For a heavy smoker , nicotine gum or patch user , it takes a longer period of time to cleanse the system of all bad chemicals .
That is a great question ! As an answer for you , I 'd point out that there are many different annuity products out there , and like mutual funds , some have higher expenses than others . It is wise to shop around , and learn what fees and expenses will be attached to the annuity , and its riders . That said , insurance companies determine cost based on risk , and when you add a guaranteed income payout rider to your annuity , the risk of you receiving a payout that exceeds what you paid in id pretty good , so the companies will charge you more . Just like life insurance for a smoker is higher , as their health risks are higher than a non-smokers are . I always advise that you speak with an advisor that you can trust before making any investments , as they all have pros and cons to consider . If you contact me , I 'll walk you through this in a little more detail . Thanks for asking !
Smokers are considered a health risk and unfortunately will always pay a higher premium . The serious health conditions that are associated with smoking means smokers have a shorter life expectancy . If one is a smoker the best course of action would be to seek some type of smoking cessation program . One small word of advice ; if your option is the electronic cigarette this will show up in the para-meds as nicotine usage . In some cases it will afford you a lower premium however your rating class with most insurance companies will be listed as smoker .
A quote , in short , is an estimation of premium you can expect to pay for your life insurance policy - the premiums can be paid annually , semi-annually , quarterly , or monthly . Please note , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . There are 4 main factors that determine the premium for the coverage - your age , the amount of coverage you 're trying to secure , how long you want it guaranteed for , and your risk classification . The risk classification is the MOST important factor in determining how much you can expect to/will pay for your coverage . If the medical history is not factored into the quote -LRB- e.g. you 're only running numbers based on someone 's date of birth and/or height/weight -RRB- , any quotes provided are pretty much meaningless because they do not provide an accurate representation of what you can expect to be approved at . To provide a little background on risk classes : every life insurance company has different underwriting guidelines that determine what risk class an individual qualifies for . The company will look at your personal medical history , smoker status , height/weight profile , results of the medical exam -LRB- if applying for a policy requiring it - no exam policies typically cost more -RRB- , your family medical history -LRB- e.g. cancer or heart disease before age 60 in the immediate family -RRB- , motor vehicle record , and any hazardous activities you may participate in -LRB- such as aviation , scuba diving , drag racing , etc -RRB- . Since every company has different guidelines for qualification , one might offer a better risk class than another based on the aforementioned information , resulting in a lower premium for the same coverage . The different risk classes someone can be assigned by a carrier are : Preferred Plus -LRB- sometimes seen as Preferred Elite -RRB- this means the proposed insured is typically in superior health , normal height/weight profile , no chronic illnesses , lab results within normal range , no immediate family members died from heart disease or cancer before age 60 . Preferred this means the proposed insured is in excellent health . Height/weight may be a little over the most preferred range , treatment for high blood pressure or high cholesterol usually acceptable , lab results normal or slightly abnormal . Standard Plus - this means the proposed insured 's health is better than the average . Height/weight may be higher than normal . Standard - this means the proposed insured is in average health and has a normal life expectancy . Height/weight may be on the high side , possible treatment for several minor conditions , one or more parents died from heart disease/cancer before age 60 , slightly elevated lab results -LRB- such as higher than normal blood pressure or cholesterol -RRB- . Substandard - this means the proposed insured has a below average life expectancy -LRB- commonly seen as high risk life insurance -RRB- . Height/weight may be considered obese , treatment for chronic illnesses or major health conditions -LRB- such as prior heart attack , cancer , diabetes -RRB- , abnormal lab results . Substandard ratings are expressed as a table rating , usually designated as Tables A-J or 1-10 . Each additional table increase is usually a 25 % increase over the standard risk class rates . Tobacco user risk classes are preferred smoker , standard smoker , and substandard smoker . There is no preferred plus or standard plus risk classification for tobacco users . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your case among multiple carriers to see who will offer you the most favorable risk classification for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are several ways that a life insurance company can know or learn that you smoke -LRB- what you smoke was not specified but we 'll go for tobacco on this one -RRB- . 1 -RRB- Self Reporting - they ask you on your application if you are a tobacco user and , depending upon the value of the policy being applied for , may ask for fairly detailed information on your type and frequency of tobacco usage . So , to honestly complete the initial application the applicant themselves should be the person informing the insurance carrier about their tobacco use status . 2 -RRB- Physical Exam - as a condition of your application you may be required to get a basic physical examination where things like height & weight can be verified and where , quite often , blood and/or urine samples are also taken to screen for health issues and to detect drugs such as Nicotine in the applicant 's system . 3 -RRB- Electronic Medical Records - most life insurance carriers will check your application 's answers against information about you in the Medical Information Bureau . An indicated history of tobacco use when none is reported on the person 's application would be an underwriting red flag . Also , information about whether you have been issued life insurance as a smoker , declined or rated as a smoker on a life insurance application can also turn up . 4 -RRB- Leg Work - few of us will have this problem , but if you are applying for a really large amount of life insurance the insurance carriers may actually conduct investigations into an applicant 's background and medical history . These may include interviews with friends and family . So , if they figure out you are really a Mafia boss rather than the president of the local trash company , your application for $ 50 million in coverage may get turned down . To take out a life insurance policy as a non-smoker when you really are a smoker would be an act of fraud -LRB- a misrepresentation on the applicant 's part -RRB- . And even if you were to get issued at a non-smoker 's rates that does n't mean you are home free . Life insurance policies standardly have a two year contestability provision in them where the insurance company can terminate or adjust the policy if it can prove that you made any false statements on your application . But , if your misrepresentation about your tobacco use is determined to meet the legal requirements of fraud -LRB- pretty good chance they will -RRB- then the contestability period is indefinite .
Typically , cigarette smokers will pay about 3 times the premium of a nonsmoker . If table rated , the difference could be higher , partly because of the pricing structure , partly because the insurance company may determine that smoking makes that person much more of a risk due to his/her health condition . If regularly using tobacco other than cigarettes , there are a handful of companies that will charge nonsmoker rates -LRB- but not preferred nonsmoker -RRB- . These run about half of smoker rates . If an occasional cigar user , some companies will rate preferred nonsmoker .
The short answer : Much more expensive than if you did n't ! Rates for smokers tend to be twice -LRB- or more -RRB- as expensive as rates for non-smokers . Some life insurance companies are better suited to smokers than others , so keep this in mind if you are shopping for a policy . An independent agent who has access to a wide variety of carriers can find you the best rates for your particular situation .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Why Is Dental Care Not Covered By Medicare ?
This is a great question , routine dental care is just not something that original Medicare covers right now , however you can recieve dental care from a medicare approved part C plan also known as Medicare Advantage plans as well as you may be able to enroll in a stand alone dental plan . You are welcome to contact our office for help if you are in one of the states that we are licensed in .
A Medigap Plan F only covers a dental service if Medicare covers it . Routine dental care is not covered by Medicare . Some procedures may be covered under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. you had to go to the emergency room and it was medically necessary to repair something in your mouth immediately -RRB- - you can check with Medicare if you 're not sure if a given procedure would be covered . One of the ways carriers differentiate themselves is by offering `` value-added services '' . Value-added services regarding dental are simply discounts on dental services - not dental insurance . Medigap plans are standardized meaning the plan itself is exactly the same , regardless of the carrier you buy it from . If you want coverage for routine dental services such as checkups , x-rays , fillings , etc. , you would need to add a separate dental insurance plan to provide coverage for routine services . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Unfortunately , Medigap does not cover routine dental examinations . Although Medigap Plans are designed to fill the gaps in Original Medicare , they will only pay for Medicare-covered services . Routine dental care is not covered under Original Medicare ; therefore , it is also not covered by Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- . Medicare will only pay for dental services that are an integral part of a Medicare covered procedure . Some exceptions include , reconstruction of the jaw following accidental injury , or extractions done in preparation for radiation treatment involving the jaw . Medicare Beneficiaries often purchase a separate dental plan to meet their individual needs . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
Medicare does not cover `` dental '' . While `` Medicare Advantage '' covers some `` preventive care procedures it does not cover extensive dental procedures . There are `` dental '' policies available the coverage is usually limited to $ 1000 per year . In most cases dental maintenance is best planned to have preventive cleaning done each year plus any required `` dental filling ' each year but then if you need more extreme procedures you will probably spend a chunk of your vacation funds in the dental office
Medicare generally does not cover dental or vision . However , there are certain conditions when Medicare may provide some coverage - this is generally when it 's an integral part of a covered procedure . For dental , Medicare may provide some coverage when it 's an integral part of another procedure , such as procedures conducted during a hospital visit , covered under Part A. Routine checkups , cleanings , fillings , etc. are not covered by Medicare . For vision , Medicare will cover some preventive and diagnostic eye exams such as for glaucoma or macular degeneration . Routine eye exams are not covered by Medicare . You can purchase a separate dental and/or vision insurance plan through an insurance agent/broker .
You would be best served to assume the answer to this question will be `` No '' , especially if you are over age 18 . Vision exams , eyeglasses and contact lenses are generally covered under a separate vision insurance plan if your employer offers one or you choose to purchase coverage in the individual market . There are certainly some self-funded employer health plans and union health plans that include vision coverage in the major medical package but these are relatively rare . An area of confusion and frustration for many businesses and individuals who are purchasing health insurance plans that meet the minimum essential benefits requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that it requires that PEDIATRIC dental and vision services be covered under the major medical plan . Of course , some people just hear the dental & vision part and think it applies to adults enrolled in the plan -LRB- it does n't -RRB- . The other big surprise can be how the pediatric dental & vision benefits are structured in the health plan . Preventive dental and an annual eye exam should be covered at 100 % . After that , the coverage can vary wildly from one insurance carrier to the next . Some design their pediatric dental & vision benefits like standard vision and dental insurance plans that people have been accustomed to . However , it is not uncommon to find that non-preventive pediatric dental and vision services are subject to the major medical plan 's deductible and co-insurance provisions . So , technically your child 's eyeglasses may be covered but if you have a $ 4000 deductible you have n't met then in practical terms this will mean your child 's eyeglasses will be an out-of-pocket expense .
Original Medicare does not pay for dental work that is part of routine care of the teeth , such as exam , cleanings , fluoride treatments , or fillings . It also will not pay for dentures . Some Medicare Supplement plans will cover some dental work . Medicare will cover oral work that done to protect or treat the patient 's general health , or to prepare the patient for surgery , radiation , etc that will be performed for a health condition . It will also cover jaw surgery for a broken jaw , or follow up to an infection after an extraction . If the dental patient has a life threatening condition , Medicare may pay for the cost of hospitalization but not the dental work itself .
No . Routine dental services and procedures are not covered by Medicare . Medicare only pays for dental services that are conducted in a hospital - this is covered under Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- . You should purchase an individual dental insurance policy to secure benefits that cover dental care services / procedures .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Yes and No . ObamaCare compliant health insurance policies must cover PEDIATRIC dental and vision coverage . This means that dependent children age 18 and under will have some level of coverage for dental & vision care but there is no adult dental coverage in today 's health insurance coverage . In most cases , dental insurance is handled under a separate dental insurance policy even if an individual or group has their health and their dental insurance with the same insurance company .
No . Medigap plans do not cover dental care . Some carriers may offer what 's called `` Value Added Services '' which , in short , is offering discounts on dental work - please note , it 's NOT dental insurance . If you 're looking to buy dental insurance , you would need to purchase an individual dental insurance policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap policy and dental insurance coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No , Medigap plan F does not cover dental , nor do any of the other Medigap plans . If you have a Medigap plan and want to have dental insurance , you would need to secure an individual dental insurance policy . Please note , when looking for dental insurance programs , please please please make sure you look at the details of the programs . Many times I see people buy dental discount plans thinking they are dental insurance plans - they are NOT ! Make sure what you 're buying is dental INSURANCE ! I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Original Medicare does not include routine dental care . If you have a Medicare Advantage plan , some plans will include basic dental care . If you want a dental plan , review plans carefully . Be aware that some plans are not insurance but only offer a discount if you use network providers . Insured dental plans vary widely in price and benefit .
Medicare Part B covers most medically necessary outpatient and doctor expenses . In addition , some prescription drugs are covered under Medicare Part B if they are injectible or infusion therapy administered in a doctors office or medical clinic . Routine dental care is not a covered item under Medicare Part B . You might consider a separate dental plan if you feel you need help paying your dental bills .
Health insurance does not cover dental implants unless there is an accident and severe damage to teeth . Dental insurance may cover implants , however , dental insurance is limited to a fixed dollar amount each year . For example the most common dental insurance pays a maximum of $ 1,500 in benefits a year and only 50 % of major work . If the dental policy covers inplants it may pay 50 % of one or two in a year .
This is a great question , routine dental care is just not something that original Medicare covers right now , however you can recieve dental care from a medicare approved part C plan also known as Medicare Advantage plans as well as you may be able to enroll in a stand alone dental plan . You are welcome to contact our office for help if you are in one of the states that we are licensed in .
No , root canals are covered under Dental Insurance Policies , and usually as a basic service . You would need to purchase a dental plan to cover that procedure . Most traditional dental plans cover it as a basic service , with an 80/20 coinsurance after the deductible . That 's where you pay the deductible first , then the plan pays 80 % of the bill , and you pay 20 % . But , before you just buy a dental plan , and go get the procedure , check to make sure what the waiting period for basic services is ... Many dental plans have a 6-12 month waiting period for those types of procedures .
Routine dental and vision care -LRB- such as annual eye exams , routine dental checkups , fillings , crowns , etc. -RRB- is not covered by Medicare and therefore a Medigap plan does n't cover it . Some procedures may be covered under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. you had to go to the emergency room and it was medically necessary to repair something in your mouth immediately or your eye was injured -RRB- - you can check with Medicare if you 're not sure if a given procedure would be covered . Medigap plans are standardized meaning the plan itself is exactly the same , regardless of the carrier you buy it from . Some carriers may offer value-added services with a Medigap plan such as discounts on some services with certain physicians , but not actual dental and vision insurance . If you want to have dental and vision coverage , you would need to add them as a separate supplemental plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Routine dental care -LRB- such as routine dental checkups , fillings , crowns , etc. -RRB- is not covered by Medicare and therefore a Medigap plan does n't cover it . Some procedures may be covered under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. you had to go to the emergency room and it was medically necessary to repair something in your mouth immediately - you can check with Medicare if you 're not sure if a given procedure would be covered . Medigap plans are standardized meaning the plan itself is exactly the same , regardless of the carrier you buy it from . Some carriers may offer value-added services with a Medigap plan such as discounts on some services -LRB- e.g. 10 % of a service -RRB- with certain dentists , but not actual dental insurance . If you want to have dental coverage , you would need to add them as a separate supplemental plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Health Insurance and Dental insurance are definately not the same . Dental insurance most certainly is an optional product that can be purchased stand alone alongside any other medical product . Dental insurance always has a specified `` waiting period '' before services can be performed and dental insurance either pays on a percentage of the total bill or it pays a flat dollar amount per service billed . All dental policies have a calendar year maximum that is payable . Some have deductibles , some do not . Health Insurance on the other hand always has a deductible and out of pocket , does not have a waiting period , and does not have an annual cap on benefits . Dental benefits or out of pockets do not have anything to do with health insurance out of pockets .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Where Can I Get Health Insurance In Georgia ?
Several carriers write major medical insurance in Georgia , including Aetna , Blue Cross , Humana , Cigna , Kaiser and United . Each carrier has their strong points and weaknesses . Some offer plans that do not cover brand Rx or will only cover generics and a few brand name drugs . Currently -LRB- 2013 -RRB- there are no plans that include maternity benefits , and no carriers that offer child only coverage . I suggest you talk to a local agent that is familiar with several carriers and can explain the benefit of each .
Health Insurance rates in Georgia are going up . Each family 's cost is going to be different . Your best resource is a local broker that represents multiple companies including major medical companies . The rates in Georgia are different in the Atlanta metro area versus other parts of Georgia . You will need to look at the networks in your area and determine if your doctors are in the network being offered by the insurance company . Health Reform has brought challenges to the price of family coverage . There are new options in the Georgia market to help handle the rising premiums . You might consider clinic programs , tele-medicine , high deductible plans , or many other solutions that lower costs and improve Out of Pocket expenses . The Health Insurance world is changing and you will need help . Do a web search for your area and health insurance and do a review of your current situation to determine if you can do better .
Health insurance is regulated by each state . Before you can buy a policy in Georgia -LRB- as an example -RRB- a carrier must file their policy form and rates with the state Dept. of Insurance and wait on approval . This is a long and costly process . About a year ago GA passed a law that allowed carriers to market products from other states in Georgia . So far not a single carrier has filed for approval to sell in Georgia . Despite what some people believe , even if you were able to buy coverage from another state the savings would be nominal , if anything at all .
There are many websites that offer you the chance to see free life insurance quotes by inputting your information . That is a good place to find life insurance in Georgia . Be sure that the website uses privacy measures and has good reviews . Getting referrals or looking at blogs is another way to find a good life insurance agency in Georgia , as is reading answers from a website like this one .
If life insurance proceeds in Georgia are left to a person as beneficiary , creditors can not take the money away from the beneficiary to pay the debts of the insured , -LRB- unless the beneficiary was co-signer to that debt -RRB- . If the life insurance proceeds are left to the estate , then creditors in Georgia can access those benefits to pay off the debt owed them by the deceased .
Some Blue Cross plans will write life insurance , usually through a sister company . In South Carolina life insurance policies are issued through Companion Life Insurance Company . In Georgia , life insurance policies are written by Greater Georgia Life Insurance Company , Some Blue Cross companies are stock carriers , others are mutual , and a few are not-for-profit companies .
The best way to find the cheapest health insurance in Georgia is to work with an independent agent . That health insurance agent does n't work for just one carrier so they will be able to show you plans from all the major carriers . A lot of agents will also have a website -LRB- like ours -RRB- where you can compare quotes instantly online .
Essentially there are two ways to buy a Medigap plan in Georgia . You can buy direct from a carrier or through an agent . When you buy direct from the carrier you get the same plan at the same rate as buying from an agent . Carriers have in house representatives that can only tell you about their plan . They do n't know about competitor plans and are prohibited from discussing a competitor plans . Once you purchase a plan from a carrier any follow up questions are handled by a CSR rep. When you call you can expect to have an automated service answer your call , following the obligatory `` Press 1 for English '' you will be told to `` Please listen carefully as our options have changed '' . From there you will be routed most often to voice mail . Your call will be returned on their schedule , not yours . You will never talk to the same person twice . Or you can buy from an agent that lives in Georgia and is familiar with plans in your area . Some agents will insist on coming to your home , while others will allow you to purchase over the phone using email and your mailbox . Some agents will only represent one carrier . If you go that route you might as well buy direct . Most agents will represent several carriers and help you understand the pro 's and con 's of each carrier . They will be familiar with rate history and can tell you which ones have a better track record of customer service . There are about 15 or so carriers in GA that offer Medigap . Some only sell direct or through their own representatives . Others use independent brokers that represent several carriers . Maybe a third of carriers make their rates available online but most will only disclose rates if you talk to them direct or through an agent . Hint : Some of the most competitive rates are not found online ... Most of the plans use issue age rating but a few , including the top two carriers -LRB- ranked by sales -RRB- use attained age brackets . You need to understand the difference in pricing structure and rate history if you want to avoid sticker shock on renewal . #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
Original Medicare has the same benefits whether you are here in Georgia where I am or in Alaska , Hawaii or Maine . Medicare supplement plans also are identical in every state with regard to plan design . On the other hand , Medicare Advantage plans will vary within a state and from state to state .
The best way to shop for the lowest cost of any medication , including Ocella , is to visit the web site goodrx.com , which allows you to enter the name of any medication , the zip code where you want to pick up the medication , and then shows you a list of local pharmacies , along with the estimated cash price , and a coupon you can use at the pharmacy of your choice to get the lowest price possible . In my zip code in Georgia , I see cash prices ranging from $ 63 to $ 87 , and discounted prices from $ 33.57 -LRB- at CVS -RRB- to $ 57.15 . Everyone , with or without insurance , should always shop for their medications on this site . It 's THE place to find the best deal possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I live in Georgia also and have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I live in Georgia also and have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
As a small business -LRB- under 50 FTE lives -RRB- , PPACA will eventually offer you an ability to send your employees to the exchange where they can select from several carriers . The Federal Exchange in Georgia -LRB- check your state to determine whether they have an exchange or are using the federal exchange -RRB- will not be ready to offer multiple choices -LRB- PPACA SHOP Plan -RRB- until 2015 . We believe , at this time , the employer may select a single carrier and plan to offer if they so chose . Talk with a licensed agent about your state 's program as state exchanges may allow multiple choices .
The cost of health insurance for a family can vary depending on the plan you choose , the state you live in various other factors such as age and smoking status . The quickest way to find out what health insurance costs for a family would be to go to a website for an independent agent that will let you run a quote or you can call us . Our website allows people to be review plans from all the major carriers in under 60 seconds . Click `` other '' on our website to go the the page to run a quote for a family . You can also give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 . We have helped many clients in Texas , Florida , Georgia , North Carolina , South Carolina , Michigan and Colorado find a great health insurance plan for their family .
Medigap Plans will vary in cost depending on your age , smoking status and the state that you live in . It will also depend on which Plan you go with . Some plans can range between $ 100 - $ 200 per month in states like South Carolina , North Carolina , Colorado , Texas , Michigan and Georgia . However , premiums in Southern Florida are generally higher than in other areas of Florida . The amount of co-insurance , deductibles and co-pays you can save by having a Medigap Plan makes it a very easy decision to make . You can get more information on our website about what the different Medigap Plans would cost . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
Georgia law does not require health insurance companies to allow someone to join an insurance policy just because they intend to get married . However , your finance can purchase a policy on his or her own , and you could help pay the premiums if you would like . Ultimately , in the vast majority of cases , the cost of her coverage would the same whether she was added to your policy or if you purchased the exact same plan for her individually . In that regard , there really would not be any advantage at all to adding your finance to your current policy .
Medigap plan F is , in my opinion , the most overpriced , oversold Medicare supplement plan on the market . In Georgia Medicare supplement plan F for a 65 year old ranges in price from $ 118 to $ 249 . They are all identical in every way except price . When you pay more you do n't get more , you simply paid too much .
Medigap insurance rates vary by age , gender , zip code , tobacco use , plan design and carrier . Since all plans with the same letter are identical in every way except premium rate , you should consider lower cost carriers . Here in Georgia plan F for a 65 year old can range from $ 120 to over $ 200 per month . Shop around . When you pay more you do n't get more you simply paid too much .
You will need a new vehicle registration in Texas and with it a new Texas policy . there are honestly some differences in coverage that are routine in Texas and not so much in Georgia . For example in Texas you typically can buy PIP which is Personal Injury Protection which affords you and your passengers some coverages including wage loss that are not usually offered in GA. . In Ga most folks have medical payments coverage in lieu of PIP . It is not the same but is more limited . Keep in mind that much of auto insurance revolves around complying with state law . The DMV in both states gets a data feed form the companies on policies as they incept and as they are cancelled . With the situation you describe I think our agency may uniquely able to assist you . We currently are licensed in both states and can assist with your transition . So give us a call 1 - 866-933-4372
Unlike omst parts of the Affordable Care Act , if you are employed by a business with less than 50 full time employees , your employer has the option of offering coverage , but not is not mandated to do so . The health law does not require businesses with fewer than 50 employees to offer health insurance to their workers . Small Employers wanting to offer coverage to employees may do so using the SHOP exchange , which is meant to help small business owners find affordable coverage . The government offers certainincentives in the form oftax credits and deductions to encourage employers with fewer than 25 employees who set up coverage through SHOP and help pay for it . Currently in Georgia , the only way to sign up for a SHOP plan is to go see an agent , broker or insurance company and fill out the paperwork . Online enrollment is scheduled to be available during next fall 's open enrollment period , starting November 15 , 2014 .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Does Medicare Voucher System Mean ?
There is much discussion about the proposed Medicare voucher system , and most of it is erroneous . The proposed system is no different from the current way of making Medicare available to beneficiaries . When you currently enroll in Medicare you have the option of following the traditional system of a government managed plan or you can enroll in a private system -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- . If you choose the Advantage plan , dollars normally spent on your care through Medicare are paid to the insurance carrier issuing your coverage .
A Medicare voucher system allows Medicare beneficiaries to pick their coverage from a variety of options . In reality , a voucher system is no different from the way you pick plans now . Medicare beneficiaries can opt for traditional Medicare or may use taxpayer dollars to fund at least a portion of the cost of a Medicare Advantage plan .
There is much discussion about the proposed Medicare voucher system , and most of it is erroneous . The proposed system is no different from the current way of making Medicare available to beneficiaries . When you currently enroll in Medicare you have the option of following the traditional system of a government managed plan or you can enroll in a private system -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- . If you choose the Advantage plan , dollars normally spent on your care through Medicare are paid to the insurance carrier issuing your coverage .
The Medicare voucher system gained some attention during the last election when Paul Ryan talked about ways to make Medicare more accessible to beneficiaries . It is no different from the current system in that you have a choice between original Medicare or a privatized Medicare Advantage plan funded -LRB- in part -RRB- by Medicare .
A Medicare voucher program as proposed by Paul Ryan would mostly work like the current system . Your current options are to enroll in traditional Medicare and buy a supplement plan or not . Or you can opt out of original Medicare and enroll in a privatized Medicare Advantage system offered by insurance carriers .
Some members of Congress are promoting a Medicare Voucher System that would provide vouchers to Medicare eligible recipients and allow them to purchase insurance from a private company . The theory behind this is that it will promote competition and rates will go down . It will also , according to proponents , save the Government money since they no longer will have to administer claims . Whether this will come to pass is anybodies guess at this point .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
There are different degrees of healh care coverage from complete to none around the world . I am assuming that you mean other industrialized nations that provide government supplied health care . With a single payor funding for health care is done through several methods of taxation . Usually when you review individual tax brackets in these other countries you 'll find they are considerably higher than here in the US . Other countries also use what is known as a value added tax -LRB- VAT -RRB- to certain products or services that generate additional revenues to support health services . While there is a constant debate on which system is better , one must remember all systems cost money and no system is `` free . '' A dollar spent in healthcare is a dollar spent anywhere you are . Some countries ration their healthcare by availability and others by price . Healthcare is going to be a tough problem for every nation as the population world wide ages and continues to grow in number . No system is perfect , all systems are strained right now . .
When your agent was talking to you in the beginning about all of your insurance needs did they ask you about the alarm system ? Some but not all insurance companies will require an active alarm system to offer theft coverage on owned property . Most insurance companies will offer premium discounts on property coverage with an active , central station monitored alarm system but will not exclude theft coverage without the alarm . I would recommend that you contact your agent and ask them for a copy of your original application if you do n't already have a copy . That will indicate how the alarm system question was initially answered . Also , ask your agent if your insurance company requires an alarm system to be covered for theft on your property coverage . I would do this as soon as possible . If your company does require the active alarm to have theft coverage , then you will want to get that alarm system up as soon as possible to avoid having a break in or burglary denied by your insurance company . The thing to remember is that every insurance company is different in their policy forms . I would find out about this right away from your insurance company/agent .
There are two types of Lupus - systemic and non-systemic . Most insurance companies will decline systemic Lupus , but there are several that will accept people with non-systemic Lupus . Often , these plans may be graded , meaning you would n't get the full benefit immediately , but after a few years it would be full value . There are also guaranteed issue insurance plans that can provide some coverage . A licensed broker can help you find a plan that will be the best for your situation .
Universal health insurance can also be referred to as single payor health insurance and is a term used to denote a health insurance system that covers all citizens of a nation . Generally the concept of a Universal Health Insurance system is used in reference to the government run or managed systems such as are found in Canada and many European countries . While there are variations on the theme from country to country the objective , as the name implies , it to provide health insurance coverage to every citizen of the country regardless of their income or health status . Usually Universal Health Insurance systems are funded by taxes paid by the nation 's citizens and businesses . The concept of Universal Health Insurance sounds appealing to many and is becoming part of the ongoing debate in the United States about how to finance our citizen 's health care needs . In theory everyone would have comprehensive health insurance coverage with the cost spread out amongst every citizen and with lower overhead costs as a single , government run agency administers the health insurance system . In practical terms , the real world results of such systems have fallen short of perfection and have their own sets of problems and sources of dissatisfaction just as we experience with our current mixture of private and public based health insurance systems here in the United States .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Though many will claim Obamacare , which is designed to cover non-Medicare beneficaries , does not have any effect on Medicare , such a statement would be false . There are many provisions in the Affordable Care Act that call for funding reductions in the Medicare payment system , including a provision , including the following : * Medicare Funding Cuts of $ 457 Billion by 2020 . Approximately 50 % of cuts are proposed to come from Medicare providers in the form of reduced reimbursement rates . These cuts are expected to offset 30 % of the cost of reform for those under 65 . * Fewer Providers expected to be available 96 % of Providers in US Accept Medicare 80 % Accept New Medicare Patients -LRB- 60 % in Texas -RRB- Medicare Enrollment Growing by 10,000 people per day 28 % of New Medicare Recipients Has Trouble Finding A New Primary Care Doctor in 2012 30 % Proposed Reimbursements Reductions will lead to even fewer doctors accepting Medicare More Providers Opting-out of Medicare System -LRB- including the Mayo Clinic -RRB- Fewer Doctors + More Patients = Longer Wait Times * Medicare Advantage Funding Cuts $ 135 Billion through 2019 , including $ 7 Billion this year 2014 , . This has already lead totewer Plan Choices , Reduction in Benefits andHigher Premiums for many . * Tax Increases 3.8 % Additional Medicare Tax on High Earners 3.8 % Tax Increase on Investment Income 2.3 % New Tax on Medical Devices $ 72 Billion in New Taxes to Insurance Companies These taxes that will eventually by passed on to consumers in form of higher prices ! * Closing the Donut Hole * 50 % discount on brand name drugs * 7 % discount on generics * Consumer Rebates for Reaching Gap * By 2020 , the Donut Hole will be replaced with 25 % cost sharing on all medications * 3.4 million Americans Will No Longer Fall in to the Donut Hole Each Year * 27.5 million Americans that Never Reach the Donut Hole Will Pay More for Their Drugs * More Free Preventative Care Services are now availablerventions for tobacco users * Creation of Accountable Care Organizations and Independent Advisory Board Accountable Care Organizations - places a degree of financial responsibility on the providers in hopes of improving care management and limiting unnecessary expenditures . ACOs that lower the cost of care for their members will by paid 50 % of the cost savings generated by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services . Independent Advisory Board Goal of reducing the per capita rate when growth in Medicare spending exceeds targeted rate . Board will recommend changes that become a bill and sent to the President and Congress to pass . If not passed , Congress must provide a budget with equivalent funding cuts .
There is no uniform health insurance system in Europe , each nation has it 's own system . On the whole , European nations have taken a more socialized approach to financing health care than we have in the United States -LRB- though ObamaCare is kind of changing that -RRB- . In Switzerland you are mandated to purchase private health insurance . In Britain they have the National Health Service that provides health insurance for the masses while at the same time having a growing private health insurance and health care delivery system for the people who can afford to operate outside of the national system -LRB- the class system remains alive and well in England and many European nations -RRB- . Some European systems give the illusion of being `` free '' but people are really paying for their care in the form of higher taxes and rationing of care along with price controls on healthcare providers . While there are things we Americans can learn from the European experience , the Europeans have hardly achieved perfection when it comes to health care and health insurance .
Medicare does not cover medical alert systems , neither will most insurance carriers , even with a doctors written prescription . However , you should check with your insurance provider to see if they will cover yourmedical alert system . Some states have programs that will help Medicare beneficiaries , who meet certain criteria , pay for the alert systems . These programs are usually accessed through the local County Aging Services .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
21st Century Insurance Company -LRB- direct -RRB- is now a wholly owned subsidiary of Farmers Insurance ; a full service insurance company utilizing the Agency system . The system has proven to be expensive in the opinion of customers ; the agency system is set up for clients todeal with their carrier through the agents for all inquiries creating a sales opportunity every time a client needs assistance . 21st Century specializes in discount preferred Auto Insurance and they do a great job at it ! The company itself does not offer Homeowners Insurance ; their telephone representatives are trained to cross sell property insurance through their referral system . Since their Auto Insurance is very inexpensive and they have a great track record , most of their customer base have their property insurance placed independently .
It depends on what happened to your heating system . Homeowners insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses . Homeowners insurance is not a maintenance policy and it does not cover items damaged due to wear and tear or age . Ifthe heating system caught fire or was damage from lightning you would be covered . If the system is just not working properly because it 's old than unfortunately there is no coverage .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Life Insurance Expire At A Certain Age ?
Term life insurance has a time certain period according to the contract provision , i.e. 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 or 30 years . Permanent life insurance can expire at a set age , by design , like life expectancy age 85 or at the maturity date , which can vary , i.e. age 100 to age 121 .
No , life insurance does not expire at a certain age . Each life insurance policy has its own parameters , whether the policy is Term , Whole or Universal Life . Be sure you understand those when you take out your policy , or you may find yourself uninsured just when you need it most .
All life insurance expires it is just a matter of when . Term life insurance is purchased by the expiration date . Term can be purchased by level premiums for 5-10-15-20-25-30-35 years . Technically term life insurance will not expire on that date but the premiums will increase drastically in most cases ten fold and expire around age 80 or 85 . On permanent life insurance or cash value life insurance , the expiration is determined by the level of premium . On a whole life or universal life you have different levels of premium known as minimum , target and maximum . The target premium can be set for a certain age . Most common is age 95 or age 100 . There are several companies that will allow the target to be adjusted to an age range of 105 to 150 years old . Which it would be a miracle to live past age 150 , but if one did , the policy would expire .
Yes term insurance ends at a certain age as stated in the policy contract . The age that term policies expire has risen over the years . I have observed over that the age most term insurance policies expire is a couple of years before projected life expectancy . For example when life expectancy was 67 , policies expired at 65 , 76 then 75 , Now most expire at age 85 . Term policies do contain a conversion to permanent insurance before a specified date . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Yes , a life insurance policy can expire . Some Term policies will expire at the end of the term , while others will go into years of annually renewable term -LRB- meaning the premium can go up every year -RRB- before the policy expires . Permanent insurance will not expire if it is set up to last until death at any age , and if all policy payments are on time with no unpaid loans . Some permanent life insurance policies are set up to expire at a certain time .
Life insurance coverage stops on the expiration date of the policy or your death , whichever occurs first . Setting that expiration date is very important . Actuaries determine the risk of a person of a certain age dying within a certain period . As you grow older that risk increases a great deal . That risk is the basis upon which the expiration date and premium are set .
It really depends on the type of life insurance policy you have . On term life policies they have a guaranteed level premium for a certain period . Most common are 10-20-30 years . The policy does not necessarily expire on the date but the premiums will increase about ten fold . On cash value plans such as whole life or universal life , they really do n't expire but rather endow . This means the cash value now exceeds the face amount . When purchasing these plans a good agent will set up the `` target '' premium to endow at your chosen age . Some companies will allow you to endow at age 150 . The short answer is you decide the `` expiration '' date .
Yes generally term insurance policies end or expire at a certain age . The exact age depends on the particular policy , but age 85 is common . Term insurance polices are often renewable and convertible . That means that they renew for a higher premium at the end of each term 10,20 , or 30 for example . It also means that up tp a specified age you can convert them to a level premium permanent insurance plan that does not expire before you do . An independent life insurance broker representing several companies can help you find the right policy at the right price .
Yes , usually term life insurance policies run out or expire at a certain age , age 85 for example . The reason it is usually not always is that there is coverage called Term 100 , which covers you to age 100 as the name suggests . Typically policies renew at a higher premium at the end of each term 5 , 10 , 20 or 30 for example and then expire as stated at say age 85 . Most are convertible to a level premium permanent insurance plan prior to a stated age . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you get the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
It generally does not expire at an exact age and most people wont keep a term policy past the term premium guarantee period . The premium guarantee period on a traditional term life insurance policy will last until your term period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 30 year term policy , the premium will remain fixed and guaranteed for 30 years -RRB- . When the term period expires , the policy changes to annual renewable term insurance and the premium will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- - this can generally be continued up to age 95 on most policies . However , the premiums that would be needed to continue the coverage will be SUBSTANTIALLY higher than what you were paying before and will only go up and up . Term policies on a UL chassis may keep the premiums the same past the term guarantee period , but rather than the premium increasing , the death benefit will decrease each year - can vary by company . Another type of term insurance is banded coverage - meaning premiums will increase every 5 years as you hit the next age bracket . These are generally term insurance to a specific age - generally up to either 80 or 90 . If you live past the designated max age , the coverage will cease immediately -LRB- if kept that long -RRB- - supplementing your term coverage with permanent coverage can be of great value .
Whole Life Insurance does not expire ; it endows . When you hit a certain point in the policy -LRB- usually age 100 -RRB- , the cash value equals the face amount . At that time you can take the cash , or let it keep growing . The policy will never expire even after it endows .
Yes , typically from a premium stand point term life is much cheaper than whole life . The reason is term life insurance has a shelf life or expiration date . You are essentially `` renting '' the coverage . The premium is guaranteed level for a certain period of time such as 10-20-30 years and then it will either expire or have steep premium increases . Whole life premiums are plans designed to be level for your whole life . You will see whole life plans guaranteed to ages 90-95-105-121-150 . Naturally to insure that type of guarantee the premiums will be much more expensive than term life rates . Also , whole life insurance has a value add of cash value that accumulates that can be used for things like retirement , college funds or an unexpected critical illness . Term life is just a death benefit .
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
What happens when you Life Insurance policy expires depends on the type of policy and the event . If the policy expires because it is reached the end of contract and there is no option for renewal , the policy end . For example term policies usually expire at a specified age . You usually have an option to convert to a permanent policy sometime before the expiry date . If you mean by expiring going out of force because of non-payment you , if you are healthy you can often reinstate the policy by payment of back premiums . Some policies have a cash value that is paid when the policy expires or matures . The policy wording would specify . If you have any questions , or feel that I could be of asssitance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
If you have Term life insurance , the policy will expire when the term ends . So if you have 20 year term , the policy will expire at the end of year 20 . Either that , or it will jump up to a price that is unaffordable for most people . If Whole Life for which premiums have been paid on time and , if there there loans , the loans have been repaid with interest , the policy will not expire . It may endow , which means the cash value equals the face amount , allowing you to take the proceeds while alive . But it will not expire . Universal Life that has a no lapse guarantee is similar to Whole Life . Most Universal Life policies have a shorter guaranteed period after which they might expire . Usually , they last much longer per current interest rates . You would have to order a current illustration to find out how much time is left on your UL at both current and guaranteed interest rates .
If you have a term life insurance that is set to expire soon , run , do n't walk , to find out your options before it expires . You can ask your current agent , call the life insurance company , or pick out an agent you feel you can trust and ask them to compile your options for you . If your health has gotten worse since you took out your term policy , you may not have the option to buy as much coverage as you would like , in a new policy . Converting your term policy to Universal or Whole Life allows you to keep the same amount of coverage and even be rated the same as you were before , without having to answer a single health question . Many term policies are convertible to the end of the term or to a certain age , whichever comes first . Some are only convertible for part of the term . If conversion is not an option , you must either pay the new higher premium , or purchase a new policy when your current term coverage expires .
Term life insurance has a time certain period according to the contract provision , i.e. 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 or 30 years . Permanent life insurance can expire at a set age , by design , like life expectancy age 85 or at the maturity date , which can vary , i.e. age 100 to age 121 .
Term life insurance policies technically do n't expire until age 90 or 95 -LRB- with most carriers -RRB- . However , most people only keep a term life insurance policy until the term premium guarantee period expires -LRB- e.g. if you have a 20 year term policy , you 're likely only going to carry it until the end of that 20 year period -RRB- . When the term premium guarantee period expires , the policy structure will do one of two things : 1 -RRB- the premiums will increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- by substantial margins , or 2 -RRB- the premiums will remain the same and the death benefit will decrease each year . Many people often review their term insurance policies well before the term period expires because they may want to replace the policy with a new one to create a new term period to secure low rates while they 're young and healthy or change the amount of coverage they need to reduce their premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your term insurance coverage , including quotes and policy analysis and comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends on the type . Assuming you consistently pay your premiums , if you have term insurance , it can expire . If you have permanent insurance , then no . Term insurance keeps the premiums fixed and guaranteed for a specific number of years -LRB- e.g. 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- . After the term period has expired , the premiums change to annual renewable term insurance and increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- . You can elect to continue the existing term insurance policy up until age 90 or 95 -LRB- with most policies -RRB- , however , the price to keep that policy in force becomes astronomical and you would never pay it past the first couple of years . Most people replace a term insurance policy with a new term or permanent policy . Permanent insurance is designed to cover you for the rest of your life . The only way a permanent insurance can expire early is if it 's `` dialed down '' - meaning the death benefit is designed to only go to a specific age/policy year -LRB- e.g. dialed down to age 90 -RRB- . Dialing down a policy can be useful to reduce your premiums , but still provide good coveragelongevity . I hope the input helps . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Term life policies expire at different points in time , depending on what the policy states in it 's declaration pages . Older policies may expire at age 70,75 or 80 . The older policies ending that early reflected the life expectancy of the time when they were issued . Newer policies expire around age 90 to 95 these days in most cases . Still a great question to ask if you are purchasing term insurance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Life Insurance Cover AD&D ?
Life insurance does cover the AD of AD&D , which is accidental death . It does not cover the final D , which is dismemberment , unless there are living benefits built into the policy , or perhaps by virtue of a critical illness or disability income rider . Life insurance without living benefits only pays out the face amount upon death , although money can be borrowed from the cash accumulation within Whole Life or Universal Life ,
AD&D stands for accidental death and disability . All life insurance policies will cover accidental death and most cover all causes of death . Most life insurance policies do not cover disability . However with some you can take out a rider on the life policy to pay a benefit to pay in the event of you becoming disabled .
A life insurance may have an Accidental Death Rider that would cover AD&D but not all policies have this rider . It will still pay for accidental death if it does not have this rider but not dismemberment -LRB- loss of limb , etc -RRB- . If you want Accidental Death and Dismemberment then make sure your policy has this rider or purchase a separate Accident policy .
AD&D stands for Accidental Death and Dismemberment . While AD&D can be a rider that pays extra if the insured person dies from accidental death , some policies are stand alone AD&D policies . These AD&D policies that are not connected to a life insurance policy ONLY pay if the insured person dies from accidental death . I.e. they will not pay anything if death is due to illness or old age . So be very careful that you know what type of policy you are getting if you see AD&D in the description .
I believe you 're referring to AD&D policies -LRB- accidental death and dismemberment -RRB- . Every life insurance policy covers accidental death . Traditional life insurance policies provide full coverage -LRB- paying out proceeds in the event death occurs by illness or injury -RRB- . Partial coverage policies only covering accidental deaths are known as Accidental Death & Dismemberment -LRB- AD&D -RRB- life insurance programs . These policies typically feature much lower premiums than full coverage programs , but only pay out a death benefit if death occurs under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. dying in a car accident -RRB- . If you only have an AD&D policy and you die due to a heart attack , the policy would not pay out any proceeds because that would be considered death due to illness . Even though the premiums are less with AD&D policies , it 's worth paying the premiums for a full coverage life insurance policy because individuals are most likely to die due to illness than they will by injury .
They are two different policies . An AD , D policy only covers accidental death and dismemberment . A life insurance policy will pay a death benefit regardless of the cause of death unless specifically excluded . Since ost people do not die as a result of an accident , AD&D policy premiums are far lower than life insurance premiums . An AD&D rider can be added to most life insurance policies .
No , D & D is in addition to accidental insurance . The full name is AD&D , which stands for accidental death and dismemberment . Some life insurance policies allow you to add an AD&D rider , which pays extra if you die by accident . But a standalone AD&D policy only pays for death or dismemberment caused by an accident .
That is a great question ! I think that there are a lot of people who are confused about AD&D policies and life insurance . I think that often people assume that the AD&D policy is a cheaper form of life insurance , and therefore can `` save '' by purchasing one of them instead of the more expensive life policy . That is sadly not the truth . An AD&D policy will indeed pay if you pass away , but ONLY if your death falls within the very limited definition of `` Accidental '' as the insurer defines it . If you have a heart attack or stroke the policy wo n't pay - they are n't `` accidents '' . If you have a reaction to a spider bite , it 's not an `` accident '' . There are far fewer people who die from accidental causes than from natural causes , so the coverage offered in most cases is paid for , and uncollected . A life insurance policy will pay no matter what the cause , so is much more sure to pay . An AD&D policy is a cheap way to supplement your coverage , and is a good thing if you work in a hazardous job , but please do n't use it for primary coverage , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Life insurance does cover the AD of AD&D , which is accidental death . It does not cover the final D , which is dismemberment , unless there are living benefits built into the policy , or perhaps by virtue of a critical illness or disability income rider . Life insurance without living benefits only pays out the face amount upon death , although money can be borrowed from the cash accumulation within Whole Life or Universal Life ,
No , AD&D is not the same as Life Insurance . Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance only pays if death is cause by an accident , or if a limb is lost due to an accident . It will not pay if a person dies from illness or old age . Even if the accident is cause by illness -LRB- e.g. getting in a fatal car accident while having a heart attack -RRB- , an AD&D policy will generally not pay the death benefit . Life insurance pays for death cause by illness or by accident . Since most death occurs by natural causes , more death benefits are paid , and the policy has a higher premium than AD&D . But the chance of having a permanent Life Insurance policy pay out is nearly 100 % , where the chance of ever collecting on an ADD&D policy is very low .
Life insurance differs from AD&D in that Life Insurance pays for death by any reason , whereas AD&D only pays for death by accidental reasons . AD&D stands for Accidental Death and Dismemberment . If the death is due to falling down stairs , car accident , etc , the policy will pay the death benefit . And some policies also pay for the loss of an extremity . But if death was due to illness -LRB- even an accident caused by illness , such as driving into a tree while suffering a heart attack -RRB- , the policy will not pay . Life insurance covers both types of death : natural and accidental .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an experienced life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a term insurance policy may be more suitable to the need than a permanent policy . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Once you 've figured out how much coverage you want and how long you need it for , you then need to find the carrier 's program that is going to offer the coverage at the lowest possible cost . This is where the risk classification comes in . This is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for . You also want to make sure of the type of coverage you have - full coverage or Accidental Death & Dismemberment -LRB- AD&D -RRB- . With full coverage , the proceeds are paid out whether death occurs by illness or injury . Under an AD&D policy , the policy only pays out if you die by a specified circumstance -LRB- e.g. a car crash -RRB- - if you die by illness and you have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit . This is important because people see the price of an AD&D policy and it looks very attractive because it 's cheap . That 's because you 're more likely to die by illness than you are of an injury . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
AD&D -LRB- accidental death and dismemberment -RRB- can be a stand alone policy or a rider to a life insurance policy . Life insurance policies pay in the case of death , regardless of the cause . AD&D policies only pay if death -LRB- or dismemberment -RRB- is the result of an accident . AD&D plans have a place but should not be your only form of life insurance
Great question ! There are a couple of major differences . Perhaps most importantly is what they will pay out for . An AD&D policy will only pay if you pass due to an accidental death as defined by their definition of `` accident '' . A sickness , or other health issue -LRB- heart attack , stroke -RRB- will not be considered an accident , so there would not be a payout for a claim . A Life Insurance policy would pay out for both causes of death , accidental or health related . A benefit of the AD&D policies is that if you are disabled as a result of an accident you can file a claim and be compensated for the injury , something a Life insurance policy wo n't . Many Life insurance policies include an accident rider that increases the death benefit if the death is by a covered accident , and nearly all will offer it as a rider . I would not advise that someone purchase an AD&D policy as their sole form of protection , as the vast majority of deaths are health related , but they can add some nice extra protection . If you have any questions , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be glad to help . Thanks for asking !
Life insurance pays from all causes of death , including suicide -LRB- after 2 years in Canada -RRB- . . The accidental death pays if the death results from an accident . With AD&D policies this can actual increase depending on the type of accidental death . It is usually quite inexpensive , but since it can not be counted on in every circumstance should not be counted on totally in any planning . The dismemberment portion as the name suggests pay for loss or loss of use of parts . For example loss of a limb due to an accident or loss of sight . The AD&D policy or rider will provide a schedule of what portion of the face amount will be paid for each occurrence . In Canada AD&D riders are often are seen with Disability and Automobile Insurance policies If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Life insurance can cover death in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- Full coverage 2 -RRB- AD&D Full coverage means that the life insurance policy will pay out a death benefit regardless of whether death occurs by illness -LRB- including old age & natural causes -RRB- or injury . This is the most common type of life insurance that is purchased because a person is much more likely to die due to illness than they are by an injury -LRB- e.g. car accident or a plane crash -RRB- . AD&D is short for Accidental Death & Dismemberment . This kind of life insurance , while typically cheaper than full coverage , only pays out a death benefit if death occurs due to injury -LRB- the types of injuries that are covered may be outlined in the plan as opposed to general language -RRB- . Given that the average person is much more likely to die due to illness than they are from injuries , full coverage is a much more desired option for people . If a person dies by illness and has an AD&D policy , this coverage will not pay out a death benefit . It 's important to consult with an experienced life insurance broker to compare your options and help you determine the type , amount , and length of coverage that will be most suitable to your needs and budget and which carrier can offer that coverage at the lowest rates . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
No , AD&D , Accidental Death and Dismemberment Insurance , is not the same as Life Insurance . AD&D only covers death or dismemberment that occurs as the result of an accident , such as car accident or falling off a ladder . Life insurance covers death due to all types of illness and all types of accidents . It even covers death by suicide after the first two years .
I am not familiar with `` D&D '' , could you mean `` AD&D '' ? That is an accidental death and dismemberment rider on life insurance policies . Those are stand alone polices as well . As a rider added to a traditional life policy it doubles the face amount benefit in case of accidental death and triples the face amount if death by a common carrier -LRB- plane , train , ferry -RRB- . It will also pay a scheduled percentage in case of loss of limb -LRB- arm , hand , leg , foot -RRB- or loss of hearing or sight . These are usually very inexpensive to add to a policy . Just remember accidental death is still covered as any other death on a traditional life insurance policy .
Life Insurance is different from AD&D in that Life Insurance covers death by ANY reason , whereas AD&D only covers accidental death . The difference in the cost between the two types of policies is because the cause of death is due to illness far more frequently than it is due to accidents ; therefore , the Accidental Death and Dismemberment policies can charge less .
An Accidental Death and Dismemberment policy is a life insurance product . It can come in two different forms . There are term and permanent life insurance policies that offer AD&D as a rider to the life insurance to increase the face amount proceeds in case of accidental death . The dismemberment pays on a schedule depending on the limbs effected . There are also AD&D standalone policies that only cover an accidental death or dismemberment . The plus side of these polices usually require little or no underwriting which gives ill people an opportunity to have some life insurance coverage were as they may not qualify for any other type of life insurance . They are also very affordable premiums . The downside is the odds of dying accidental versus dying from an illness are very very high . This is why they are easy and cheap , because the odds are in the life insurance companies favor not to pay a claim .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Glucose Meter Is Covered By Medicare ?
Glucose meters -LRB- blood sugar monitors -RRB- are covered by Medicare Part B as a type of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- that your doctor prescribes for use in the home . The company that makes the device is not going to change whether or not it 's covered under Part B. Medicare Part B covers approximately 80 % of the cost and you 're responsible for the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan can help pay your portion of the cost of the blood sugar monitor .
Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance - when you have both of these , it 's commonly referred to as `` Original Medicare '' . Services and procedures performed to treat the diabetes condition would be covered by Medicare . Original Medicare only covers about 80 % of the expenses - you can supplement the Original Medicare coverage with a Medigap plan to cover a portion or all of the other 20 % of healthcare expenses -LRB- there 's 10 different standardized plans and you 'll want to consult with an experienced Medigap broker to determine the one that 's right for your needs and budget -RRB- . Prescriptions to treat diabetes -LRB- e.g. insulin , metformin , etc. -RRB- would be covered under a Part D plan that supplements your Original Medicare coverage . Refer to your plans formulary to see if a specific prescription is covered . Glucose meters , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets can be covered under Part B as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Glucose meters -LRB- blood sugar monitors -RRB- are covered by Medicare Part B as a type of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- that your doctor prescribes for use in the home . The company that makes the device is not going to change whether or not it 's covered under Part B. Medicare Part B covers approximately 80 % of the cost and you 're responsible for the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan can help pay your portion of the cost of the blood sugar monitor .
Glucose meters -LRB- blood sugar monitors -RRB- are covered by Medicare Part B as a type of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- when your doctor prescribes for use in the home . The company that makes the device is not going to change whether or not it 's covered under Part B. Medicare Part B covers approximately 80 % of the cost and you 're responsible for the other 20 % . A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan can help pay your portion of the cost of the blood sugar monitor .
As far as I know , all glucose meters are covered under Medicare Part B . If the equipment provider is an approved Medicare provider , there should be no problem . You can find Medicare approved providers by following this link WEBSITELINK Enter your zip code the follow the prompts to locate Medicare suppliers .
Medicare is concerned about diabetes type II and includes coverage for many diabetes testing equipment and supplies . Your doctor must prescribe your diabetic supplies . Some of the Medicare Part B covered items include testing strips , glucose meters , lancets and insulin but ONLY IF it is used in a pump . Levemir flexpen 's are part of Medicare Part D . If your drug plan includes the flexpen under the formulary some of the cost may be reimbursed .
Medicare Part B covers some diabetic supplies , including blood glucose testing monitors , blood glucose test strips , lancets , lancet devices , and glucose control solutions . People with diabetes may receive shoe inserts to prevent foot sores , and some may even receive therapeutic shoes . Medicare Part D covers syringes and other supplies associated with the administration of insulin .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover earthquakes . This type of risk is specifically excluded . A homeowner would be required to purchase an additional earthquake policy to cover this type of risk . Depending on where you live the rates can be low to very high -LRB- and what is high -RRB- if you live in a high risk earthquake zone . The average deductible is 15 % of coverage so no small chunk of change . I am in California which is earthquake territory and believe all homeowners should carry earthquake coverage who are in high hazard zones . Average replacement for a home can range from 350k-1 million and so can your loan amount . While your deductible may be 80k -LRB- just an average -RRB- this is far less then the potential of a total loss which can run 500k . Keep in mind , your home does not have to fall to the ground . If the home even shifts of the foundation the chances are your looking at a total loss . In California all Insurance carriers are required by law to offer you earthquake coverage when you purchase a homeowners insurance policy and make the offer available again at renewal at least every two years afterward . A homeowner then has the option to accept or reject coverage . I often get allot of phone calls right after a shaker . The problem is in many cases moratoriums go up and earthquake coverage is not available for a couple of weeks so if your thinking about getting earthquake insurance , do n't think about it . Purchase the coverage and sleep better at night . And I recommend an automatic earthquake gas shut off valve be installed on your gas meter to help prevent gas leaking into your home and a sudden explosion .
Medicare Part B-covered Diabetes Supplies : Blood sugar -LRB- also called blood glucose -RRB- self-testing equipment and supplies are covered as durable medical equipment for all people with Medicare Part B who have diabetes , even if you dont use insulin . Self-testing supplies include : Blood sugar monitors Blood sugar test strips Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions for checking the accuracy of testing equipment and test strips . Medicare Part B covers the same type of blood sugar testing supplies for people with diabetes whether or not they use insulin . However , the amount of supplies that are covered varies . If you use insulin , you may be able to get up to 300 test strips and 300 lancets every 3 months . If you dont use insulin , you may be able to get 100 test strips and 100 lancets every 3 months . If your doctor says its medically necessary , Medicare will allow you to get additional test strips and lancets . Medically necessary means that services or supplies are needed for the diagnosis or treatment of your medical condition and meet accepted standards of medical practice . You may need to keep a record that shows how often youre actually testing yourself .
When you rent a car you are responsible for any accident you might have with the car and are also responsible to return the car to the agency in the same condition as when you rented it . While the insurance offered by the rental company may be overpriced they do not do any of the underwriting and investigation of the driver that a normal insurance company will do . That makes their selection process less critical and their prices higher . The advantage of the insurance that they offer is that you can return the automobile or tell the company where the automobile is located and the insurance that you purchased from them will complete your contract with the rental company -LRB- that is not a legal opinion , just an observation . -RRB- The coverage on your current automobile extends to a car that you have rented . If you have inadequate coverage on your private automobile you will have inadequate coverage on the rental car . If you are involved in an accident the rental company will try to keep the meter running on the rental agreement if you dont have their insurance .
To protect yourself and your family against the financial risk of illness or injury and to finance necessary preventive health care needs . If you are a billionaire you can disregard this advice . If you are a regular American then you disregard it at your own peril . Health care is expensive . I had to answer this question recently for some people who had immigrated to the U.S.A. , were rather young to early middle aged and who had n't had occasion to use much health care in our country yet . So here are a few ball park figures I gave them from a report from 2012 . The average cost of an appendectomy is around $ 13,300 . The average cost of a day in the hospital is over $ 3400 . A normal child birth runs around $ 8000 and a C-section birth can be in the $ 12,000 to $ 13,000 range . And this is just normal run of the mill life events most people will experience at some time . My late cousin lost his 7-year battle with prostate cancer and while he participated in a lot of experimental programs as M.D. Anderson that were either free of heavily subsidized we still loosely estimated that his medical costs that he could track over that period were well in excess of $ 2 million . My niece delivered a premature child at 26 weeks and the child spent another 6 + months in neonatal intensive care , they 've crossed the $ 1 million dollar threshold and the meter is still running as their child will probably require some level of treatment for the rest of his life . Oh , and you need to have health insurance to protect yourself against the individual mandate tax penalty included in ObamaCare . Which in 2015 will be $ 325 or 2 % of your income -LRB- whichever is greater -RRB- and that will steadily increase in following years . Hopefully this will help answer your question as to why someone would need health insurance .
Diabetes Supplies & Services Supplies : Medicare Part B -LRB- Medical Insurance -RRB- covers some diabetes supplies , including : Blood sugar -LRB- glucose -RRB- test strips Blood sugar testing monitors Insulin Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions Therapeutic shoes or inserts Part B covers some diabetes services , including : Diabetes self-management training Yearly eye exam Foot exam Glaucoma tests Nutrition therapy services -LRB- medical -RRB-
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . An exception to this to have insulin covered under Part B is when insulin is administered via a medically necessary insulin pump - under this scenario , an external insulin pump and the insulin may be covered as durable medical equipment . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . If you 're looking for a Medigap plan or are interested in seeing if a lower rate is available compared to your existing plan -LRB- Medigap plans are standardized -RRB- , please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Yes and no . Medicare covers a lot of parts to diabetic care , but some of it will have to be covered by other means . For specific diabetic benefits , your original Medicare coverage -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- will cover certain testing supplies and services including blood sugar testing monitors and testing strips , lancet devices and lancets , and glucose control solutions . These items are considered durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- and would be covered under Part B. Prescriptions such as insulin and metformin -LRB- common treatment medicines for diabetes -RRB- would be covered under a Part D prescription drug plan - Part B would not provide coverage for these types of diabetic care items . Original Medicare only covers 80 % of the expenses so you may want to consider adding a Medigap plan to cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . Consult with an experienced broker who can review your specific medical history and help you determine the best course of action for your needs . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part B does not cover the insulin prescription itself - that can be covered by prescription drug coverage under a stand-alone Part D plan . Part B can cover certain diabetic test supplies as durable medical equipment -LRB- DMEs -RRB- such as glucose testing monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets . Medicare would pay for 80 % of Part B covered expenses - you would be responsible for the other 20 % . A Medigap plan can cover the other 20 % of expenses for you . Consult with an experienced Medigap broker to see which plan would be most suitable for your specific needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part D does cover some diabetic supplies . Part D will cover supplies that are used for administration of insulin -LRB- syringes , needles , alcohol swabs , gauze and inhaled insulin devices -RRB- . Medicare Part B covers diabetic supplies such as blood glucose monitors , test strips , lancet devices , and lancets .
Yes , Medicare Part B covers durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- . This includes wheelchairs , nebulizers , blood glucose monitors , hospital style beds and more . For them to cover it , you need a valid prescription from the doctor which includes your name , date of birth , address , the type of DME that you need , the duration of time you will need it for , and a diagnosis code for the condition it is treating . With that prescription , any medical supply store that is contracted with Medicare will be able to provide the equipment .
A urinalysis costs approximately $ 35 - $ 60 , depending where you live and what facility is used to conduct the test . Typically , it is part of a routine examination or annual physical . Many items are checked with this type of testincludingyour liver and glucose . If you have existing medical coverage and the test is considered preventive , the insurer may pay for the entire cost .
The blood test used for life insurance exams tests for HIV , cholesterol and other lipids , drug use , cotinine -LRB- a metabolyte of nicotine -RRB- , liver function , kidney function , and blood glucose . While not testing for specific diseases , the blood test results can point to a variety of diseases and further documentation may be ordered if exam results are questionable .
The blood work done for a life insurance exam tests for glucose , cholesterol , triglycerides , liver function , renal function , drugs , nicotine , and some related labs . By these they can determine whether there may be underlying risks of which even the applicant may be unaware .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Is Western National Life Insurance Company ?
If you want to know more about any particular insurance company , I recommend going to a resource that can give you independent information or ratings . For example , if you were buying a microwave , I would suggest Consumer Reports . You can research most insurance companies through AMBest.com , WeissRatings.com , or StandardandPoors.com . `` I am a Farmers agent but my posts are my own and are not statements by or for Farmers . ''
Western National Life Insurance Company -LRB- WNL -RRB- merged into American General Life Insurance Company -LRB- AGL -RRB- on December 31 , 2012 . Their corporate office is in Amarillo , TX . They offer many different types of annuities and single premium life insurance . Their annuities include : single premium , flexible premium , single premium immediate annuity and single premium delayed annuity .
Western National Life was acquired by American General Life in late 2012 . American International Group -LRB- AIG -RRB- owns American General Life . So Western National Life is now part of American General , and American General is owned by American International Group . They are not the same , however , as American International Group is simply the parent holding company .
In simple terms adverse selection means that a health insurance company enrolls a population mix where the claims being incurred by some enrollees exceed the total premiums being paid in by all enrollees . If Insurance Company X finds itself paying out $ 1 billion a year in claims while receiving only $ 800 million in premium it is experiencing adverse selection and losing $ 200 million that year . Adverse selection can occur in a variety of ways but it all comes down to the simple math I described above . Preliminary enrollment results from the recently concluded open enrollment period point towards a rather broad based adverse selection in the enrollment across the nation . The enrollment mix , while trending somewhat better towards the end , still indicates that enrollees tended to be more females than males -LRB- women consume more health care than men over the course of their lives -RRB- , older than the general population -LRB- older persons consume more health care than younger people -RRB- , and have more chronic health problems than the general population -LRB- for example , the number of enrollees requiring expensive HIV medications was substantially above the level of the general population -RRB- . We appear to have reached approximately 25 % enrollment in the `` young & healthy '' demographic when the initial actuarial projections were that the program enrollment mix needed to be around 40 % for things to work out . While it is too early to project what this will mean for rates in 2015 , and the impact will vary from state to state , I am already seeing industry reports that are projects substantial double digit rate increases in most states and possible triple digit increases in some states . States such as New York which had already largely decimated their individual insurance markets and had some of the highest insurance rates in the nation to begin with will probably be impacted less because of the high starting point they were already at . Many states in the south , mid-west and western U.S. which generally had much lower health insurance rates prior to ObamaCare implementation will likely be the areas who will experience the largest increases . Here in Tennessee I am already beginning to see increases for small group plans in the 20 % to 60 % range as ObamaCare compliant plan designs are being phased in .
According to their website , Western Southern Life Insurance Company has the following ratings : Standard & Poor 's : AA + AM Best Company : A + Fitch : AA It takes a good life insurance company to get good ratings . To compare the prices of Western Southern Life Insurance products with the life insurance offered by other highly rated companies , use an online quote engine or call in to an agency that sells more than a few carrier 's products .
Western National Life Insurance Company -LRB- WNL -RRB- merged into American General Life Insurance Company -LRB- AGL -RRB- on December 31 , 2012 . Their corporate office is in Amarillo , TX . They offer many different types of annuities and single premium life insurance . Their annuities include : single premium , flexible premium , single premium immediate annuity and single premium delayed annuity .
Coverage for acupuncture typically varies from one company to another , with many offering no coverage at all . While the Affordable Care Act does require all new health plans to cover many tyeps of therapies , acupuncture is still not regarded as a traditional medical in most Western societies and , as such , is typically not covered by most health insurance providers . That aside , there are some companies , including Aetna and Blue Cross Blue Shield -LRB- in some states -RRB- that do offer a limited number of acupuncture visits each year . To find the best plan for your personal situation , it is best to speak with a licensed , independent agent that works with most , if not all , the insurance companies in your area . That will give you the chance to discuss the exact options available to you , and provide the expert guidance needed to select the best possible plan for your needs .
The term ` Escrow ' has a double meaning . Escrow is utilized mainly in the Western States as the legal process of closing the purchase or refinancing transaction of real property ; Escrow Companies exist to facilitate the purchase , sale & refinancing of real property transactions . In States where Escrow Companies are not used , Mortgage and Title Companies utilize ` Closing Professionals ' to facilitate the same process . During the Escrow/Closing process , if a mortgage is involved , it is customary for the mortgage lender to require that all taxes are current and property insurance is paid in full for the first year . Escrow companies will be charged with the fiduciary responsibility to assure the mortgage company upon funding that both conditions have been met and proven . The term Escrow is also used synonymously with a Mortgage Impound Account which is simply a savings account setup for the purpose of saving funds in preparation of making payments to renew property insurance and property taxes ; a mortgage company or bank will simply calculate the necessary amount to be deposited into the Escrow/Impound account monthly in order for a shortage not to exist when future property tax and future property insurance invoices are presented . The monthly calculation usually involves the addition of the annual property tax and the annual property insurance , a 10 % safety buffer is added , then the total is divided by 12 . The account is an interest bearing account and an annual assessment summary is sent to the mortgage holder at the end of each year . There is usually no charge associated with having this account ; it is simply to facilitate payments without the burden of a large obligation at one time for the mortgage holder . It is important for homeowners to understand the escrow and/or impound process as there seems to be many misconceptions of how the process works . It is a very simple process but the most confusing to the ley person is the fact that he/she is actually depositing a monthly savings amount into an account which will pay future invoices presented . Property Taxes are generally invoiced twice a year and Homeowners Insurance is generally invoiced once a year ; money is saved on a monthly basis in order for the funds to be present when the invoices arrive . For a further and/or more detailed explanation , you may wish to contact your Real Estate , Mortgage and or Escrow/Closing Professional directly .
There are two types of solar panels . Leased and owned . If the panels are leased , the owner will have insurance on the panels . If the panels are owned by you the homeowner , your insurance policy with Western Mutual Insurance -LRB- www.westernmutual.com -RRB- would cover the panels under your dwelling coverage limit only if the units are attached to the home . Coverage must be added to dwelling coverage A to account for the costs of labor and materials of installation .
Western human behavior is to live for the moment . And with so many cultural expectations that cost money , retirement funded takes a back seat to immediate gratification . Retirement seems so far away for the Millennial generation that it 's almost unreality . But many baby boomers have discovered that time waits for no man and retirement is suddenly upon you and staring you in the face .
Global Index Universal Life Insurance is IUL that offers interest crediting based on an equity index strategy option that includes foreign stock market indexes in addition to US stock marked indexes . Non US indexes commonly used are the EuroSTOXX 50 Index -LRB- Western Europe -RRB- and the Hang Seng Index -LRB- Hong Kong -RRB- . Depending on the Global Index Universal Life product , it usually offers the choices of a fixed interest strategy , an indexed strategy , or a combination of the two . The features of IUL that attracts consumers is the potential to accumulate higher than normal cash values through their ability to take advantage of the upside potential of the market . Yet there is a 0 % floor that helps protect them against downside risks .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
Who sells critical illness insurance ? Mutual of Omaha , MetLife , Aflac , Western & Southern Life , Lincoln Financial , United Health One -LRB- Golden Rule -RRB- HumanaOne and Assurant Health are some companies that sell critical illness insurance policies . As you can see , some are mainly Life insurance carriers and some are mainly Health insurance carriers . So you can get this type of coverage through many venues .
Liberty National Life Insurance agency is one of over 1000 insurance companies in the United States . It is owned by Torchmark Corp. , which is a financial services holding company . Liberty National is a Fortune 1000 company , so not one of the biggest . They sell Term and Whole life policies as well as supplemental health insurance policies . Liberty National is a Stock company , which means that it answers to the stock holders first and does not offer dividend participating Whole Life as do the Mutual companies like Mass Mutual , Guardian , and a handful of others . They are based in Texas and do not have a bunch of nice impressive offices around the country . They specialize in `` home sales '' - that is their agents come to you at your home to meet with you and sell their products rather than bring prospects and clients to their office boardrooms , which they do not have . -LRB- Which is why I suspect you 've asked your question ... Someone came knocking on your door ? -RRB- If you are considering purchasing a life insurance policy from Liberty National , I suggest you first read the answers to the question posted on this site , `` What are the Characteristics of Whole Life Insurance '' , and ask if Liberty National policies offer all the same options .
There is no uniform health insurance system in Europe , each nation has it 's own system . On the whole , European nations have taken a more socialized approach to financing health care than we have in the United States -LRB- though ObamaCare is kind of changing that -RRB- . In Switzerland you are mandated to purchase private health insurance . In Britain they have the National Health Service that provides health insurance for the masses while at the same time having a growing private health insurance and health care delivery system for the people who can afford to operate outside of the national system -LRB- the class system remains alive and well in England and many European nations -RRB- . Some European systems give the illusion of being `` free '' but people are really paying for their care in the form of higher taxes and rationing of care along with price controls on healthcare providers . While there are things we Americans can learn from the European experience , the Europeans have hardly achieved perfection when it comes to health care and health insurance .
That is a great question ! Globe Life is a subsidiary of Torchmark , A Fortune 500 financial services company . they were originally Liberty National Insurance company until 1980 when they acquired Globe Life , and formed the torchmark holding company . My best guess would be that they have a portion of that company that handles their banking , that most likely goes through CUNA , -LRB- Credit Union National Association -RRB- , the marketing group for your mysterious CMFG -LRB- CUNA became CMFG in 2012 -RRB- . Or CMFG bought a part of Globe 's life business , which is a fairly common practice - The big financial companies buy/sell blocks of mortgages and other investments that may include life insurance policies in order to earn more money themselves . It may be that the CMFG people -LRB- who sell services to credit unions and consumers -RRB- bought a chunk of Globes business , with yours in it . I 'd call Globe , or drop them an email to their customer service people and ask them why , and make sure you know who owns your policy , so you know who to contact/collect from . It can be very confusing when high finance starts swapping assets , and we little folk try to keep track ... I had a mortgage that was sold 4 times that I know of ! Good luck , I would n't worry too much , just be sure . Thanks for asking !
There 's hundreds and hundred 's of life insurance companies in the marketplace and there are many carriers that have a superior financial rating -LRB- `` A '' , `` A + '' , or `` A + + '' rating -RRB- . Some of the big name companies with superior ratings that feature competitive rates in the term life insurance marketplace are Banner Life , MetLife , American General , Lincoln National , Genworth , Ohio National , Principal National , just to name a few . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Here are a few of the 30 year guaranteed term life insurance companies : American General , American National , Ameritas , Aviva , Banner , Lincoln Benefit , Lincoln National , MetLife Investors , Nationwide , Principal , Protective , Pruco , Savings Bank , Security MTlNY , Transmerica , United Omaha . There are other companies who have guaranteed universal life that can be configured to perform like a 30 year term life insurance . Keep in mind that there are age limitations to 30 year guaranteed term life insurance .
Depending upon your point of view , one could say that virtually all major health insurance carriers are equally good or bad in today 's marketplace . The health insurance industry has been highly regulated at the state level for decades and with the Affordable Care Act we have an entirely new set of Federal regulations for health insurer 's to comply with . So , yes , CIGNA offers excellent services . So , do AETNA , Assurant , Humana , United Healthcare and scores of other options around the nation . Defining how `` good '' CIGNA is versus any of its national competitors is a subjective exercise that means different things to different people . In the new health insurance marketplace of 2014 the informed buyer will have to understand that the insurance carriers have to devise different ways of covering up to $ 6250 in potential financial exposure per person in different plan design configurations and price points . The insurance carriers has to come up with their own ideas as to how to have plan designs that fit into the new `` Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum '' allowed by the law . Right now that can translate into some very meaningful benefit plan design differences between insurance carriers and within the same `` metallic ' tier level . You may have one insurance carrier offering only high deductible plans while a competitor may offer some plans with different office visit and/or prescription copayments and yet they both fall within the range of being qualified `` Bronze or Silver '' plan designs . Upon examination they will find that the various carrier 's first attempts at plan designs have yielded results that are often confusing , inconsistent and can be make it even more difficult for the non-insurance person to see the value differences between various carrier 's plans . This is where you start to come to those intersections of Price , Benefits and Network that help drive a person 's buying decision . At certain price points and for certain of their plan design 's overall benefits , CIGNA can offer some of the best coverage for the dollar in today 's marketplace . The are a nationally recognized brand with an large , national provider network and a growing offering of value added programs designed to keep their members healthy or effectively manage the chronically ill . While no one can say that any insurance carrier is the `` best '' in each and every way and every location . CIGNA strives for a consistency across the large number of various insured populations they serve . I can feel comfortable in saying that CIGNA should be part of your consideration in the individual and large group market segments .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Much Is Medicare Per Year ?
If you are age 65 or over , Medicare Part A is usually free . Medicare Part B for most people is about $ 105 per month -LRB- as of 2014 -RRB- . It can be a little higher based on your income over the last 2 years . In addition to that you need to factor in the cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan and a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan . To get an idea of what Medicare Supplement plans would cost , you can compare plans on our website or give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
The premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 per month in 2014 -LRB- this number can change each year -RRB- . The premium can be higher for individuals whose incomes are in the following brackets : If filing an individual tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- 107,001 - $ 160,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- 160,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a joint tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a married & separate tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 = $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If you want to review Medicare supplements to help cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- , contact an independent agent/broker to review Medicare supplement plans available in your zip code . If you would like assistance with your Medicare supplement program or have any other questions , you can send me a private message through the `` contact me '' button .
`` Life insurance per unit '' is the cost of life insurance per thousand dollars of coverage . Child Riders are priced per unit . E.g. a $ 10,000 child rider may cost $ 60 per year , or $ 6.00 per unit . Flat extras are also charged by unit . The insurance company may add on $ 7.50 per unit of life insurance for 3 years after having surgery for prostate cancer . For a $ 100,000 policy , that would add on $ 750 per year , but then the flat extra would drop off after three years and the policy would cost $ 750 less . You can also price your own policy if you know the cost of one unit of life insurance . E.g. . If you are buying a final expense policy that costs $ 50 per unit , a $ 10,000 policy will cost $ 500 per year .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
When looking at the average cost of Medicare Part C a person should consider the monthly premium as well as the out of pocket costs throughout the year . In many states the premium for a Medicare Part C -LRB- or Medicare Advantage Plan -RRB- can be $ 0 per month to $ 50 per month . However , the max out of pocket costs can be as much as $ 6,700 per year . You will also want to make sure you are happy with the network of doctors and hospitals that are available to you . Going to a provider outside of the network can cost you a lot more . You may also need to get a referral before seeing a specialist . In contrast , those that have a Medicare Supplement Plan have a monthly premium but have far less out of pocket costs throughout the year . There is also no network which means you can see any doctor or hospital you like . You also do not need to worry about getting a referral for a specialist . The benefits of a Medicare Supplement Plan -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- can not change from year to year . An independent agent will be able to help get you all the information so that you can decide which is better for your specific situation . For more information about Medicare visit our website .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
The yearly deductible for Medicare Part B in 2013 for most people is $ 147 per year . For those with higher incomes , the yearly deductible is as follows for a single person . Above $ 85,000 to $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per year Above $ 107,000 to $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per year Above $ 160,000 to $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per year Above $ 214,000 - $ 335.70 per year
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Disability Income Insurance evaluates health factors , so the cost of the policy will depend on how the applicant is rated health wise . If a nonsmoker who is of normal weight and has no health history , Preferred ratings can be given . The price also depends on the risk of the occupation , how much income the applicant makes -LRB- and how much of that income they want to replace in case of disability -RRB- , and what bells and whistles they want on their policy . For a 40 year old male office worker who makes $ 60,000 per year , the price can be as good as $ 50 per month for a plan that will last to age 65 .
Most eligible retirees do not pay a premium for Medicare Part A . Once you have accumulated 40 Social Security credits -LRB- that means you have paid Social Security employment taxes for 40 or more quarters -RRB- you do not have to pay a Medicare Part A premium . Most eligible retirees pay a monthly premium of $ 104.90 for Medicare Part B for 2014 . This premium is however more for higher income individuals/couples . A premium chart is available on Medicare.gov . A typical stand alone Medicare Part D prescription drug plan will cost around $ 30 per month . Each of these parts of Medicare -LRB- A , B , and D -RRB- have deductibles and co-payments/co-insurance ; all details are available on Medicare.gov . Retirees often purchase a Medicare supplement insurance policy for an additional premium to provide coverage for Medicare Part A and B deductibles and co-insurance , or enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- Part C -RRB- to package and control costs of Medicare coverage . The average annual out of pocket cost per Medicare beneficiary per the most recent data is $ 4,600 per year . Any individual 's `` cost '' of Medicare will ultimately vary based upon their unique attributes and circumstances ; but to understand the variables and get some control over costs it isadvisableto meet with alicensed insurance agent/advisor who specializes in the senior/Medicare market .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
Long Term Care Insurance is recommended for those having considerable assets . If you needed to go to a nursing home or assisted living facility , or receive home health care to assist you with your activities of daily living -LRB- dressing , eating , bathing , etc -RRB- , those institutions can go after your savings and investments while you are alive -LRB- if your spouse is alive , he/she can keep half -RRB- , and even take the proceeds from your home after you and your spouse die . If you have very little in the way of assets , long term care insurance is an unnecessary expense . But if you have assets you would like to protect , and can afford the premium , having long term care insurance is an excellent tool in planning your future , preserving your peace of mind , and paying the bills if needed . And a word about life insurance policies with living benefits . I am all in favor of them , but you do need to consider how much is `` enough '' when purchasing life insurance that you may want to use if you can no longer care for yourself . Nursing home costs average nearly $ 80,000 per year , nationally , for a semi-private room . Someone wanting to hire a round the clock caregiver in their home can expect to pay over $ 175,000 per year -LRB- $ 20 per hour -RRB- . It can be expensive to buy a permanent life insurance policy with face amounts large enough to cover even a couple years of care . Just be sure you understand how much of the life insurance face amount is available to you , what triggers it takes to get it , and when you can get it . Then compare it to the price of buying long term care insurance providing comparable benefits .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost per person in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . You may also have options for group coverage through your employer . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much renters insurance premiums depend on how much coverage you actually would like to carry on your personal items and how much liability protection you would like to obtain . Rates can run as low as 100.00 - 300.00 per year on average . I recommend you consult a local independent agent and discuss your personal needs .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
How much does the average person pay for life insurance ? Based on my 32 years in the business as a broker -LRB- and there is no right or best answer -RRB- , I would estimate between $ 15 and $ 150 per month . This is , of course , `` per person . '' Term policies are much cheaper than permanent policies and of course that would impact the amount each person pays . And ... each person has different amounts of coverage they carry . You can purchase term coverage for under $ 100 per year depending on age and face amount . But because of economies of scale , that may not be such a good idea . You may be able to double the coverage for slightly more . Quite simply , there will be tremendous variations in the amount that consumers pay for their coverage . A fully-licensed -LRB- full-time -RRB- broker will help you find the lowest prices .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Is A Term Life Insurance Policy ?
The cost of Term Life Insurance varies according to the age , health , tobacco status , and gender of the person buying it . It also varies according to the face amount and length of the term . Generally speaking , the longer the term , the higher the premium . However , if someone gets a short term policy and then must find a new one , they may find that their health has deteriorated and they end up paying much higher premiums for the next policy . In that sense , sometimes buying a long term policy from the start can save the policy owner a lot of money .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There is no set guideline to how much you should pay for Term Life Insurance . There are general guidelines . E.g. . If you take a 10 year term policy , you should pay less than you would pay for a 30 year term policy . If the rates are similar you are much better off locking that rate in for 30 years . Another general guideline would be , if you can get a permanent policy for a price just slightly higher than term , take the permanent policy . Sometimes Universal Life rates run close to Term rates at older ages , especially if the UL rates are locked in to age 90 or 95 . Universal Life is much more flexible than Term , so if you can get it for a similar price , go for it . Aside from generalities , no one can predict how much you should pay for a term life insurance policy because life insurance rates are based on your age , sex , tobacco status , and health . You can check out an instant quote engine on internet websites to get an idea of what term rates might run for you . But you need to call the agency to get a more accurate rate .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
It depends on individual or family circumstance . A better question is how much life insurance is enough ? Remember one reason for Life Insurance is income replacement . Having enough life insurance to ensure a family is protected is usually the best place to start . A term life insurance contract typically provides a large death benefit with a low premium payment . Provide peace of mind knowing your family will be protected then decide if and how much Whole Life Insurance is enough . The term Whole Life means you will be paying premiums your entire , or `` Whole '' life . Having too much Whole Life Insurance might be an issue if the primary breadwinner loses his or her job and can no longer afford making premium payments . This is where Whole Life can be costly . When considering the purchase of Whole Life Insurance it is a long term , risk adverse strategy . Make sure you are able to make premium payments for at least 10 to 12 years regardless of job loss , increase in expenses , etc. . All the risk is transferred to the insurance carrier and the interest crediting provides a guarantee . Plus there is usually a ` dividend ' or return or premium . The only thing the insured needs to do is make sure they make the premium payments . There is no flexibility with these premiums , like Universal Life Insurance . It generally takes a long time to build cash value . For standard products and level premium schedules the break even point for premiums paid equaling cash value accumulation is generally 10-12 years . Always ask your agent questions if you are unsure of how life insurance products work .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
Some agents may say that 5 % -LRB- or maybe 7 % and even up to 10 % -RRB- of your annual earnings should be allocated toward life insurance premiums . This is dependent on individual circumstances and one of the first things you need to identify when looking for individual life insurance . In figuring out your life insurance needs , you should determine how much life insurance death benefit your beneficiaries will require . Then shop and compare quotes to get an idea of how much that amount life insurance coverage will be . Budgeting and planning for how much you want to allocate toward life insurance is important . To manage your life insurance policies efficiently reassess your need for life insurance every two to three years .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
That 's an interesting question - do you mean how much coverage do you need to purchase to ensure the value of your belongings are covered adequately , or how much should the policy have paid out to you after your claim was processed ? In the case of coverage , you would need to have an idea of how much value there is to be insured . For example , do you have a lot of electronics , or jewelry ? If so , you would need more coverage than someone who has very few of those things . If you meant how much should you have received , that depends on a lot of things specific to your policy and claim . If you would like more information , I 'd be happy to help , just contact me . Thanks for asking !
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
The answer to this is very subjective depending upon your situation , but I 'll try to make it a little more simple . The idea has always been that , when you retire , your need for life insurance decreases . Today , that 's not always the case . It 's much more complicated now , but there are some universal ideas : What is your need for pure death benefit ? How much debt do you have and how long will you have it ? How is your pension , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , etc. set up ? Will the income from this be set up in a way that can provide both you and a spouse with adequate income should either of you die ? If not , how much income do you need to provide in the event of your death ? What will your death cost in terms of funeral expenses , taxes , and estate settlement ? Do you want to have that provided for ? Do you have people or institutions that you want to leave money for ? Will one or both of you need special care ? When you answer these questions and have an amount in mind , it 's time to explore how best to go about setting it up the right way . I 'm not going to go into the type of insurance or any income you may need to offset a shortfall in your retirement . That 's a much larger discussion that I 'll leave for you and an agent you can trust . He/She will be able to talk with you and come up with the program that fits your need and your budget .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Was Universal Life Insurance Created ?
I think it was created to solve some very real problems with life insurance at the time , which was in the 70s and 80s . Up to that point whole life insurance was the only permanent product available . This product can be expensive because of the strong guarantees it provides . Many people would be willing to pay less for weaker guarantees , and so that makes the product uncompetitive . Whole life is also a fixed premium product . Even if you have deviations in cash flow , you have to stick to the payment schedule in order to retain your coverage . That can be an obstacle for people who fund their premium out of business proceeds , which can go up and down . One of the best revisions to this product has been the recent inclusion of a lifetime guarantee . You can basically lock into rates for the rest of your life . It wont develop much cash , but it really solves the problem of paying the lowest premium on a guaranteed basis forever . In this way kind of functions as a permanent term insurance . Comparatively low rates , but no risk of renewing at a crazy-high rate .
The original intent of the development of universal life insurance -LRB- UL -RRB- was to offer an integrated planning product as an alternative to buy term and invest the difference . UL provided this alternative with the tax favored treatment of conventional permanent life insurance with an interest rate crediting method that was very popular in the 1980s high interest rate environment .
Originally there was whole life insurance -LRB- steady payments each month along with cash value increasing -RRB- and term insurance -LRB- strictly insurance protection only -RRB- . At one time there were insurance companies focusing on `` buy term and invest the difference '' which was an attempt to capitalize on the lower cost of term insurance and yet having cash values growing at market rates . Univeral Life Insurance is a combintation of the two uniting lower cost term insurance with an internal vehicle that will grow invested cash at various interest rates . It has its place in the insurance world .
Why is whole life insurance bad ? Because I have something else to sell you or I have n't actually reviewed whole life because I am too lazy to learn about it as a product . Or my favorite , since the IRS created the MEC provision back in the 80 's which created a situation that if you put too much money into a policy , the tax advantages changed . Up until then , your local neighborhood stock broker would sell you life insurance as an investment as it 's qualities were very attractive to investors . Besides common sense tells me that insurance companies price their products based on the risk they bear providing insurance in every and I mean EVERY product they sell . Why would whole life be different ? Why would it be the `` only '' product witha higher price that is `` bad '' for the insured ?
This is what 's known as Universal Life insurance . These are permanent coverage programs that build cash value , much like Whole Life insurance does . The advantage of these programs is that you can pay more or pay less each month to keep the coverage going . However , when you do this , you can affect the guarantees -LRB- and even the non-guaranteed aspects -RRB- under the programs . There are two important factors to keep in mind when structuring a universal life policy , the guaranteed and non-guaranteed side . In short , the guaranteed side tells you how long your coverage is guaranteed for while the non-guaranteed side tells you how long it can continue on for , based on current assumptions -LRB- these figures can change and , therefore , the non-guaranteed length of coverage can change -RRB- . There 's also what 's called a Guaranteed Universal Life insurance policy -LRB- GUL -RRB- . These programs can create a level premium and death benefit guaranteed to a specific age -LRB- all the way up to age 121 with most carriers to guarantee the death benefit for life -RRB- . What this does is allows you to keep the premiums to its lowest levels and maximize the death benefit rather than placing the focus on the build-up of cash value , which is a common reason why many people buy whole life insurance . There are other moving parts in a universal life insurance policy , but this provides a brief overview .
It depends on the need -LRB- not a very direct answer I know ! -RRB- - the reason for this is because everyone has a different purpose for why they 're buying life insurance . There 's no one shoe fits all policy in this industry . What you need to look at first is what you need the coverage for - it 's helpful to discuss this with an independent agent who can walk you through this and help you determine the structure that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you 're only interested in buying coverage to cover a certain debt for a limited time , you may want to look at term insurance - in that type of situation , you may just be throwing excess money away . If you 're buying coverage for estate planning purposes , you would want to look at permanent coverage because you 're planning for the long run and it 's not something you want to be cheap about . With permanent insurance , there 's two main types - Whole Life and Universal Life -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of GUL programs on many occassions -RRB- . Regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . Some agents/brokers/advisors will ALWAYS suggest you buy whole life - others will NEVER suggest buying it . While it 's helpful to shop around , getting too many hands in the cookie jar can create a very confusing situation for the client.Each type of coverage has a benefit for certain situations . You need to trust the agent you 're working with to compare your needs , premium budget , the benefit level , how long you need it for , and other factors , to help you figure out what 's best for you whether that be whole life or another type of coverage .
Universal life , like any financial product should be proved suitable for the potential client . There are several reasons why universal life -LRB- UL -RRB- insurance could be right for you . To make sure , you need to create a financial profile that establishes your risk tolerance and confirms your economic goals . Universal life insurance has four policy types : guaranteed UL for indemnification and three current assumption ULs for income based on crediting options like interest rates , indices and separate subaccount using equities and bonds investments .
The marital deduction act was the basis for creating joint life insurance or survivorship insurance . The marital deduction act allowed married couples to pass assets between them at the death of the first spouse . Survivorship was created to pay the federal estate tax at the second death of a married couple , coinciding with the marital deduction act . Survivorship policies have several actuarial formats like participating whole life , variable universal life , indexed universal life , current assumptions universal life .
Every insurance plan available in the market serves a purpose so you ca n't really say one is `` bad , '' each type of plan just has to be used in the right way . Certain programs are designed to meet certain needs . You 're not going to find one plan that meets every possible need you can think of . Universal life and whole life are two types of permanent life insurance - universal life has a lot of advantages to it that you wont find in whole life . One of the major parts of permanent programs to remember is cash value . However , many individuals do not realize that when the insured dies , the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit . Whole life is generally going to be much more expensive than Universal life because of the guarantees inside the policy . Whole life can be a great tool for retirement planning , providing coverage for new borns , and other financial planning when you 're buying in your younger years , but can be very expensive in your older years . Universal life does not provide the same levels of guarantees inside the policy with regards to the cash value . The trade-off is the ability to secure lower premiums for the same amount of coverage and create flexible premiums . Whole life has been around for decades and decades . When universal life was first introduced into the marketplace -LRB- I believe around the 1970s -RRB- , if the cash value dropped to $ 0 , your policy would crash and not provide you with coverage unless you paid more into it . Around the late 90s/early 2000s , carriers started introducing what 's called a `` no-lapse UL rider . '' In short , these riders said that if the cash value goes to $ 0 , but you keep paying your premiums , the policy will still provide the death benefit coverage . The majority of universal life policies today will have this rider , now commonly known as Guaranteed Universal Life -LRB- GUL -RRB- , and can be structured to keep the premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life or up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 95 , to age 100 , etc. -RRB- . The idea being to maximize your death benefit without overpaying premiums . Contact an independent insurance agent/broker to learn more about these two products and which will be more suitable to your needs . If you 're buying strictly for the death benefit , you will likely want to look into a GUL policy .
Paid up life-insurance means you dont make anymore payments on the policy . You still get the coverage , but you no longer have to pay for it . But heres the question : suppose you wanted to keep paying ? Why wouldnt the insurance company allow you to do so ? I mean , some of these permanent insurance policies can get very cash rich . Whole life policies can pay some pretty hefty dividends . Universal life policies can apply a pretty decent interest rate . As I am sure you have heard , there can be some great tax advantages to accumulating wealth inside life insurance : tax-deferred accumulation , and , under the right circumstances , tax-free distributions . So why wouldnt an insurance company just let you go for it ? A number of decades ago , they did . People were taking out policies with face amounts of $ 50,000 or $ 100,000 , but putting huge amounts of cash into them . Huge amounts . They really milked the tax advantages of the product . Of course , the IRS got wise to this and imposed certain rules . These rules limit the amount of money that can grow inside these policies and still avoid taxation . You can exceed this limit , but then you get a tax bill . From this point of view , paid up means if you put more cash into the policy , you could create a taxable event . It also means something else , in consideration of the expenses of the policy . Lets say you take out a universal life product with a guarantee to age 100 . This means that given the proper payment schedule , both the premium and the death benefit will be guaranteed to a age 100 . The emphasis is on the payment schedule . If you meet it , then no more payments would be required to secure those guarantees . It would be paid up . Whats interesting here is that , depending on the product , a lot of flexibility exists for designing a payment schedule . You can have continuous pay and simply pay the lowest amount required annually . You could have a single pay in which just one payment in the first year will get you what you want . You could have a 10 pay , which means you just pay for 10 years - and still get the guarantees . You could have 20 pay . And so on . Depending on your cash flow and other factors , you could pay up your policy with any number of strategies . And then you simply would not have to worry about paying for your life insurance , even though you would have the coverage for as long as you need . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
There are several reasons why universal life -LRB- UL -RRB- insurance could be right for you . To make sure , you need to create a financial profile that establishes your risk tolerance and confirms your economic goals . Universal life insurance has four policy types : guaranteed UL for indemnification and three current assumption ULs for income based on crediting options like interest rates , indices and separate subaccount using equities and bonds investments . Guaranteed UL is generally cheaper than participating whole life and the three UL types have saving and/or investing options to accumulate tax deferred cash values and the potential with a TAMRA compliant non modified endowment UL to generate tax free income as long as the policy is kept in force for the life of the insured .
Universal Life Insurance , is first and foremost a life insurance policy . If you require life insurance to provide cash at death to protect your loved ones , your business or your estate then an opportunity is created for you to utilize the reserve or cash value and use universal life as an `` investment '' . In Canada , there are limits to the amounts you can fund a universal life policy to keep the `` tax advantaged '' status of being exempt from accrual taxation . For individuals and corporations in the top tax brackets this tax advantaged status alone might make Universal Life a `` good investment '' , but for most there needs to be an life insurance requirement . In Canada , all earnings inside a Universal Life policy are expressed as interest , however , they can mirror the earnings of many of the top mutual funds . One company offers 400 + investment options in a `` tax advantaged '' plan . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Life insurance addresses three major planning goals : Indemnification , Income and Inheritance . Indemnification is insuring the lives of family members or business associates for the economic benefit of their beneficiaries . To indemnify the economic liability of short term financial exposure , you may want to consider term life insurance with a conversion policy provision to permanent life insurance . If the financial liability is perpetual , a permanent life insurance policy is recommended . Guaranteed universal life is the most economical of permanent policies . Income from life insurance policies can generate tax advantaged distributions for supplemental retirement planning . There are four life insurance policies to consider based on your risk tolerance . Participating whole life and current assumption universal life use interest rate crediting methods . Indexed universal life can use domestic and foreign indices . Variable universal life use separate subaccounts allocated to equities and bonds . Inheritance planning with life insurance can address estate transfer taxation , charitable giving and creating an estate for children and grandchildren . Married couples should consider guaranteed survivorship where two lives are used in one policy which can result real savings instead of two separate policies .
It depends on the financial planning goal . Life insurance addresses three major planning goals : Indemnification , Income and Inheritance . Indemnification is insuring the lives of family members or business associates for the economic benefit of their beneficiaries . To indemnify the economic liability of short term financial exposure , you may want to consider term life insurance with a conversion policy provision to permanent life insurance . If the financial liability is perpetual , a permanent life insurance policy is recommended . Guaranteed universal life is the most economical of permanent policies . Income from life insurance policies can generate tax advantaged distributions for supplemental retirement planning . There are four life insurance policies to consider based on your risk tolerance . Participating whole life and current assumption universal life use interest rate crediting methods . Indexed universal life can use domestic and foreign indices . Variable universal life use separate subaccounts allocated to equities and bonds . Inheritance planning with life insurance can address estate transfer taxation , charitable giving and creating an estate for children and grandchildren . Married couples should consider guaranteed survivorship where two lives are used in one policy which can result real savings instead of two separate policies .
Universal Life Insurance with a no lapse guarantee has some of the lowest premiums in permanent coverage . That is partly because you can buy UL that has almost no cash value . Therefore , most of your premium is going to purchase death protection . On the other hand , Universal Life Insurance can be used to create a lot of cash value , so that it can be used for expenses or retirement income . This is especially true with Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life . Obviously , this premium will be much higher . Your age , health , and policy features all also come into play in calculating the cost of Universal Life Insurance . This is definitely one of those products you do n't want to purchase without some professional guidance . It is impossible to even compare two UL policies unless you understand what you are comparing .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There is a diversity of life insurance products to fit multiple planning applications like indemnification , income and inheritance scenarios . Term and guaranteed universal insurance are generally indemnification and inheritance products to protect the policy beneficiaries from financial liabilities or benevolent giving of the policy insured . Participating whole life and current assumption universal life are conservative interest rate crediting policies for income scenarios . Other polices for income scenarios are Indexed universal life crediting earnings from indices , both domestic and foreign as well as variable universal life insurance which can credit from the guaranteed interest account or the separate sub accounts utilizing market equities and bond instruments . Product suitability , from a policy holder point of view , is determined by creating a financial profile that includes establishing product risk tolerance , economic goals and a reasonable timeline of life events based on life expectancy .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Universal Life insurance works well for people who want lifelong coverage at the lowest possible price . GUL -LRB- Guaranteed Universal Life -RRB- can be guaranteed not to lapse to age 120 + at a level premium . Because GUL has very low cash value , the premium can be kept relatively low for permanent coverage . Indexed Universal Life is a good product for those who want a safe way to save up money for retirement income . Unlike GUL , IUL is used to create large amounts of cash value that can be borrowed tax deferred during retirement . So Universal Life really can work for almost anyone . It is flexible and can be adapted for a lifetime .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Is Medicare Advantage Affected By Obamacare ?
Obamacare reduces funding for Medicare by more than $ 700 billion between now and 2020 . This means Medicare beneficiaries will pay higher premiums , higher copay 's and deductibles and more out of pocket . The reduced funding means fewer Medicare Advantage plans from fewer carriers . When you can find a plan expect it to cost more .
President Obama has said many times that he wants to end or reduce Medicare Advantage . He does not believe that for profit insurance companies should be competing with original Medicare with taxpayer money . Part of the funding for the Affordable Care Act -LRB- aka : Obamacare -RRB- is coming from cuts to the funding for Medicare Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage . -RRB- It is expected that these cuts will increase premiums and reduce benefits for the people on Medicare Advantage and cause many of them to move back to original Medicare . Only time will tell .
Medicare Advantage plans are similar to Medicare except that actual insurance companies operate the Advantage contracts . The insurers are then paid -LRB- per insured -RRB- by the federal government . Obamacare is cutting approximately $ 200 billion from these types of plans and much of the reductions will take place in 2014 . But recently , more cuts were announced and these will certainly impact many Seniors who may have to pay higher rates or possibly lose coverage . The most recent changes involve lowering the reimbursement rates that insurers receive from the government .
The Affordable Care Act -LRB- commonly called Obamacare -RRB- has made a goal to gradually reduce the subsidies given by the federal government to Medicare Advantage plans to bring them in line with traditional Medicare . They froze the carrier subsidy levels in 2010 levels and in 2011 determined that Medicare Advantage plans can not charge more for Original Medicare for some services . Whether the ultimate goal of this subsidy reduction and its ultimate impact remains to be seen , so far , the impact upon Medicare Advantage plan premiums have been minimal .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
For some people Medicare Advantage plans are an excellent senior health insurance solution . I believe at last count we were in the 13 to 14 million seniors participating in Medicare Advantage plans . As with most every choice in life there are tradeoffs involved . Medicare Advantage plans are essentially HMO plans for Medicare eligible seniors . They offer a broad , comprehensive range of benefits and value added services and wrap everything up in one package . The flip side to Medicare Advantage plans is that their enrollees operate within the plan ` scontracted network of providers to receive their care . This does , by necessity , impose some restrictions on their member 's choices in doctors , hospitals , pharmacies , etc. , and this environment is not for everyone . That said , changes in the American health care system , some but not all prompted by ObamaCare , are also working in ways that make it more challenging for traditional Medicare enrollees to find and/or keep health care providers that accept Medicare . So , whichever way a senior citizen decides to go they will probably be faced with some difficult choices and compromises . Medicare Advantage plans vary from one insurance carrier to another . One ca n't objectively say that Medicare Advantage plans are , as a class , a better or worse choice than traditional Medicare plans . That is a determination that each individual has to make for themselves based upon their perceptions of their present and future needs . Certainly Medicare Advantage plans are an option that a senior citizen should consider but the important thing is that people have a choice .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
No . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- aka ObamaCare -RRB- is on health insurance only . It wo n't affect life insurance , auto insurance , home owners insurance or anything other than health insurance . Long term if it causes a lot of frustrated people to jump off bridges or tall buildings it could eventually have an impact on life insurance rates . But so far that frustration has been mainly found in business owners and health insurance agents and has not affected the general public . We will have to see how things go in 2014 to see if it is truly an AFFORDABLE Care Act .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
President Obama has said many times that he wants to end or reduce Medicare Advantage . He does not believe that for profit insurance companies should be competing with original Medicare with taxpayer money . Part of the funding for the Affordable Care Act -LRB- aka : Obamacare -RRB- is coming from cuts to the funding for Medicare Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage . -RRB- It is expected that these cuts will increase premiums and reduce benefits for the people on Medicare Advantage and cause many of them to move back to original Medicare . Only time will tell .
The Affordable Care Act -LRB- commonly called Obamacare -RRB- has made a goal to gradually reduce the subsidies given by the federal government to Medicare Advantage plans to bring them in line with traditional Medicare . They froze the carrier subsidy levels in 2010 levels and in 2011 determined that Medicare Advantage plans can not charge more for Original Medicare for some services . Whether the ultimate goal of this subsidy reduction and its ultimate impact remains to be seen , so far , the impact upon Medicare Advantage plan premiums have been minimal .
I do n't think is a matter of `` need '' for a medicare advantage plan , but a matter of choice . Would a Medicare Advantage plan be a better choice compared to a supplement or going with just basic medicare ? It is wise to compare these options and how they will effect you . As Ted has noted , there are some advantages to Medicare Advantage plans that make them very attractive as a choice to a consumer . So , it might be better to consider a simple basic difference between Medicare supplements and Medicare Advantage , Medicare `` rights '' . When you purchase a Medicare Advantage you are assigning your Medicare rights to that organization and commit to service -LRB- outside of emergency -RRB- to that organization as they become your Medicare provider . A Medicare Supplement does not restrict the insured to any one location or provider . For some people , this is a very important issue and could be the deciding factor .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
That is an excellent question ! According to the latest that I have read , The cuts that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- have mandated are not expected to affect the services provided in any significant way . The cuts are being made in inflated overhead costs , and in benefits paid to health providers who have high rates of return patients . -LRB- ones who were not well when released , or who picked up infections from their hospital stay , most commonly -RRB- . There undoubtedly will be some providers who will close shop , as they will see significant cuts if they are inefficient , or ineffective in the treatment they provide , and some that were being fraudulent to begin with . Overall , the consensus seems to be that no services will be greatly affected , that billing procedures will be streamlined and improved , and that patients will receive better care . Thanks for asking !
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Humana 's Medicare Advantage product is a Medicare HMO or Medicare Managed Care plan and I would presume you are trying to compare it to Medicare Supplement policies . In general terms , most doctors are n't thrilled with Medicare regardless if it is traditional Medicare or the new Medicare Advantage products sold by insurance carriers such as Humana or United Healthcare due to the reimbursement -LRB- payment -RRB- levels set by the government . You provide no specifics so it is impossible to give you a definitive answer . Medicare Advantage products have to cover everything Medicare covers and generally offer an even broader range of benefits to their members . However , the trade off from the consumer 's perspective with Medicare Advantage plans is that you must stay within their network of health care providers for your care to be covered . From the health care provider 's perspective they are almost certainly presented with a different payment methodology under a Medicare Advantage plan than the fee-for-service approach they have been used to and they will find their practice of medicine under greater scrutiny for the quality and effectiveness of the care they deliver . In my experience these types of physician remarks usually boil down to manner of payment and control issues . You should find a licensed health insurance agent who sells both Medicare supplements and Medicare Advantage plans who can explain the specifics of what each approach does and present each one 's advantages and disadvantages . Your doctor could be giving you good advice for your particular area or they could be expressing their own prejudices .
Yes , depending upon the type of health insurance you are talking about . I will presume that you are seeking coverage for a one month period because you are looking to protect yourself in a coverage gap between jobs that will offer you employment based coverage or to cover yourself until individual major medical coverage purchased during the open enrollment period starts on January 1 , 2015 . Short Term Major Medical insurance would be the solution to your problem . There are a pretty wide selection of Short Term policies available from a variety of health insurance carriers -LRB- your state 's BC/BS plan , United Healthcare , etc. -RRB- though your options will vary from state to state . Short Term Major Medical insurance will provide you with substantial protection in the event of an accident or illness during the time the policy is in effect . Also , Short Term Policies are generally pretty affordable , especially in comparison to ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . There are some issues or characteristics of Short Term Medical policies that a potential buyer needs to be aware of . 1 -RRB- They do not cover pre-existing conditions . 2 -RRB- Some policies have limited underwriting questions that they ask and you can be turned down for coverage . 3 -RRB- They do not cover preventive care services 4 -RRB- Some may not cover prescription drugs 5 -RRB- They do not meet the criteria for being considered major medical coverage under the rules of ObamaCare and could make a person subject to the individual mandate tax penalty -LRB- though you have to go for more than 90-days without ObamaCare compliant coverage for the penalty to apply -RRB- With those factors in mind , a Short Term Major Medical policy can be an excellent solution for cost effective health insurance protection and may be a much more affordable alternative to COBRA continuation coverage for a person who has lost their employer based coverage . In fact , some people who are in good health and who are low utilizers of health care services are doing the math and determining that even when taking the possible tax penalty into consideration that a Short Term Major Medical policy makes more sense for them than ObamaCare compliant major medical policies . You should exercise caution if you choose to follow this strategy and look for a Short Term Major Medical policy that will cover you for as long of a time period as possible . In some states some carriers sell policies that can run just short of a year . The reason for this is if you should experience a serious illness or injury , for example you are diagnosed with cancer , while covered under the Short Term Medical policy then ideally it would run out at the end of the year and allow you to take advantage of the open enrollment period and enroll in an ObamaCare compliant plan that is guaranteed to be issued , can have no pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods and would therefore cover your condition immediately . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent to help you find the Short Term Major Medical policy best suited for your needs .
Depression can affect life insurance rates very little , or it can affect them a lot . The severity of the depression , whether or not there were suicidal thoughts or attempt -LRB- s -RRB- , whether there was hospitalization for depression -LRB- and if so , how often and how long ago -RRB- , if the applicant is on disability for depression , how many medications are being used to treat the depression , and whether therapy is part of the treatment can all affect the rates . Mild depression treated with only one medication can result in preferred rates . A long history of depression that is resistant to treatment and has a high risk of suicide can result in a decline . In my experience , severe depression is far less common than mild depression , and most policies involving depression get rated favorably .
When Obamcare was passed in March of 2010 , one of the key objectives that had to be met from a political standpoint was showing that its costs over the coming 10 years would be under $ 1 trillion dollars . This somewhat arbitrary number was picked to say that Obamacare would cost less than what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , this may have made for good political theatre but what it really had to so with healthcare and health insurance in practical terms always kind of eluded me . One of the ways that the democrat party made the numbers work -LRB- and I 'm just stating historical facts here , no Republicans ever voted in favor of the Affordable Care Act -RRB- was that they transferred $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over that 10 year period to fund ObamaCare . We will still be spending more on Medicare in the coming decade but the amount of available funding has certainly been sharply deflected downwards at a time when a record number of Americans will be in and entering the Medicare program . So , in this way , ObamaCare has shifted funds that would have otherwise gone towards Medicare to help paint a budget picture that allowed for the passage of the law . Of course , since then government estimates for the projected 10 year cost of Obamacare has gone far above the $ 1 trillion mark but , hey , they got the law passed and they did n't even really have to read it .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What The Best Life Insurance Policy To Get ?
The best life insurance policy to get is the one that will pay a death benefit when you die . If that isnt your concern , then it would be a policy that pays a death benefit should you die during a specified period of time . The best policy in the first case is a permanent policy with a guaranteed death benefit . In the second situation select a term policy that will cover the period of time that concerns you .
The best life insurance policy for you is the policy that accomplishes all of your financial goals for the best premium rate for your age and health . You first have to determine the face amount of life insurance needed , then determine the time period needed . After that , you need an experienced agent to help you determine your rating class based on numerous factors like age , build , health , lifestyle , income , etc. . THEN you can determine the best life insurance policy to purchase .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy is the one that is going to do what you want it to for what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Pay for any damage to your home ? The Best policy would guaranty your home would be repaired or rebuilt if damaged by any cause . All policies will have exclusions or limitations . The Best policy will have the fewest exclusions or limitations . Reimburse you for loss or damage to your personal property ? The Best policy will repair or replace -LRB- new for old -RRB- your property should it be damaged from any cause . Again , most policies will have exclusions and limitations , the Best policy will have the fewest exclusions and limitations . The Best policy will include a Personal Liability limit not less than $ 300,000 and offer a good Personal Umbrella should you need or want higher limits . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur and help you return to your pre-loss position . In my opinion , the Best policy will be the one that will do all the above for the most favorable premium .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy for you is the one that is going to do exactly what you want it to for approximately what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Most likely , fix your house or repair or replace your personal things should they be damaged . If so , the Best policy for you would be the one that would guaranty just that . No policy will do that as all policies have some exclusions and limitations , but the Best policy for you would have the fewest exclusions or limitations . I suggest the Best policy would include Guaranteed Replacement Cost and all-risk * coverage on your home , all-risk * Replacement Cost coverage on your personal property . The Best policy for you would include Personal Liability coverage with a limit not less than $ 300,000 . Should you need higher limits , a good Personal Umbrella endorsement should be available providing a broad insuring agreement and few exclusions . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur , treat you professionally and help you return to your pre-loss position . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer who would not cancel you or increase your premium the first time you had a claim . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer willing and able to insure your car -LRB- s -RRB- at a reasonable price even though you might have young inexperienced drivers . If an insurance company is not willing to do provide these essential services , I question if they should be considered for any part of your business .
Getting the best life insurance quotes can be like walking a tightrope . Some agents will quote low just to get your application . Then when you are approved , they simply send you the policy , assuming you will be tired of the process and just give in and accept it.Other agents quote high because they would rather give you good news that your rate turned out lower than higher than quoted . What really matters in the end , is that you get a policy with a life insurance company that is favorable to your type of health , age , and the type of policy you get -LRB- Term , Whole Life , or Universal Life -RRB- . So no matter what quote you get , you need to pay close attention to the credentials of your agent . Some things to look at are : 1 -RRB- Are they able to shop for you from more than one company ? 2 -RRB- Do they ask questions to determine what policies and ratings you qualify for ? 3 -RRB- Do they appear to understand your health condition -LRB- s -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Do they have a following as evidenced by testimonials , referrals , etc ? 5 -RRB- If they have a website , does it have security and privacy features ? 6 -RRB- Do they appear to be sincere and honest ? If you can get in touch with an agent who has those credentials , chances are that your quote will be as accurate as possible . More importantly , no matter what your quote is , you will have the best chance at being approved at the best rate with the best company for your particular health and age .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
The word `` best '' is so subjective . Best what ? Best rates ? Best underwriting ? Best customer service ? Best claims payment history ? When you look at Insurance , compare it to purchasing an automobile . You have Mercedes , BMW , Toyota , Ford , Chrysler , Volvo . Which car is best ? Thats hard to say . Each of these makers produce cars that will start and take you to your destination . They can come with a lot of the things that make our car ride enjoyable . But what do you want ? Comfort ? Style ? Good gas mileage ? Ability to be driven for years ? High mileage capability ? It all depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay to get it . Insurance is the same way . Talk to an agent and clearly define what you want . Then look for companies that offer that product . Then you can compare prices , look into how they handle claims , customer service , etc. . Finally , realize that most Insurance companies -LRB- due to heavy regulations -RRB- have to meet certain standards to remain an Insurance company . That being said you can usually find a good fit for your circumstances if you do your research .
Here are a few tips to help you buy the best life insurance . 1 -RRB- Contact a reputable agent for advice . Whether face to face or online , conversing with someone who knows what they are doing can safe you lots of time , hundreds of dollars , and most importantly , help you get a secure policy that best suits your needs . 2 -RRB- Learn about life insurance , but do n't be narrow minded . Sometimes health factors , age , state availability , cost , etc. can keep you from getting the exact policy you want . Occasionally someone tells me that they are going to keep shopping until they find the policy in their head . What happens is , those people never get life insurance , or they end up getting Accidental Death coverage that covers only a small percentage of deaths . There are policies out there for almost everyone , and something is almost always better than nothing . But it helps to know what to ask , then accept the answer when your agent has obviously done his/her homework to find it for you . 3 -RRB- Look at carrier ratings and policy guarantees . Those three tips are all you need to get you the best life insurance .
Interestingly enough , I am often asked the question , what is the best life insurance ? There is however , no overall best type that provides all solutions . What is best for you depends on your circumstances and what you want to accomplish . Universal life because of the flexibility is considered by many to be the `` best '' . Whole life and term products could also be the `` best '' , again depending on the circumstances and what you wanted to accomplish . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
There is no one best life insurance company , and no one best type of life insurance policy . Life insurance companies are rated by rating agencies -LRB- AM Best , Standard and Poore 's , Moody 's and Fitch are the most popular -RRB- . You can look at their ratings with each agency to see how life insurance companies compare with each other . Regarding types of life insurance policies , sometimes Whole Life is best , sometimes Universal Life best suits a particular need , sometimes Term Life works best . To find the best company and policy for you and your particular need , you can visit with a reputable agent and ask them to find you the best qualify product that is suitable for your needs .
I believe family floater health insurance refers to a type of program available in India and not the United States . I 'm therefore not able to provide much help with advice for that type of specific program . However , when speaking in generalities regarding -LRB- U.S. -RRB- health insurance , what 's best for you may not be what 's best for someone else - meaning that no one plan is the `` best '' plan you can get . You 've got to look at what the pricing is in addition to what benefits you get under the plan and the networks they follow -LRB- if applicable -RRB- . I would suggest identifying what are the needs and goals you want met most with your coverage . Then , you should review plans that meet that criteria and go from there when you start looking at pricing . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To know the best type of life insurance for you , I 'd need to know some things about you . 1 -RRB- Above all , what are your needs for your life insurance ? Do you want a small policy to use for your funeral and other final expenses ? Do you want a policy that would get your three teenagers established if something happened to you ? The best life insurance for those two scenarios are very different . Discerning your purpose for your life insurance helps professionals such as myself figure out the best type and amount of coverage you need . 2 -RRB- How old are you ? Do you have any health problems ? Do you smoke ? Questions such as this give us the tools to find your best rate . 3 -RRB- What is available for you ? This is a questions we agents must answer . Some life insurance agents carry one brand of life insurance , others offer policies from scores of companies . Some agents will push one type of policy on you , others will hunt around for your best option , even if they have to refer you elsewhere . You can save a lot of time and frustration by starting with an agency who will go the extra mile to find your best type of life insurance , right from the start .
What will disqualify you from life insurance ? Well depends on you mean by disqualify as there are many forms of life insurance out there at many different price levels . There are guaranteed issue plans , credit life and a few that will insure a person for a very high premium . What you might be asking instead is what will disqualify you from the best possible rates for life insurance ? Your health is what will get you very good rates or high rates if your health is poor . There are also possible issues with travel , credit and occupations and hobbies . But , the best price is usually tied to best possible health . You are your discount .
To get life insurance on your mom , sit down with her and ask her what medications she takes , her height and weight , what health conditions she has had in the past and currently . Ask her what she wants to spend , or if you are the one who will be paying for it , ask her what amount she would like to see you get for her . It will seem less intimidating if she has a say in it . Then contact a website or agency for a quote . If you are getting it for final expense purposes , you will want to get a permanent policy . When getting life insurance on someone else , it is usually best to buy a No Exam policy , if you can . Your mom may have to do a phone interview to be approved . They will draft the first premium from your or your mom 's checking account when she is approved , and her policy will be in force .
Using an independent agent can help ensure that you get the best life insurance policy possible for your budget . People often begin the life insurance buying process by getting quotes for low cost life insurance from a few different websites . This is a good way to do basic research and get an idea of what your life insurance policy might cost . But when it comes to making a decision to apply for life insurance , we find most people really want to talk with a professional who can answer their questions and help to make sure that they are choosing the best life insurance policy for their needs .
Getting the best term life insurance involves using a reliable agency , getting matched with the best company for your health , getting the lowest price , getting good guarantees , and using a life insurance carrier with a high rating . Your agent can help you with all these . However , if you want to do some sleuthing ahead of time , you can go to websites that offer term quote engines to see what policies you might qualify for . Then go to the home page of the carriers that come up , to find their ratings . That way you will be a knowledgeable consumer who can help your agent get you set up with the best term life insurance for YOU .
There are many companies that will say they sell the best life insurance . But , aside from looking at ratings from agencies like AM Best and Moody 's , there is technically no best life insurance company , and no best type of life insurance policy . Life insurance companies are highly regulated , and different policies meet different needs . So the agent who sells the best life insurance is the one that finds the best policy for YOU .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Is The Insured In A Life Insurance Policy ?
The Insured in the life insurance policy is the person whose life is being insured . If the Insured person would pass away , the policy would pay the death benefit to the person or persons named as the beneficiary . The Insured will often own his/her own policy , but the Insured and Owner can be two different people . The Owner gets to choose the beneficiary and make changes to the policy .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
Who should own a life policy depends on facts and circumstances surrounding the purpose of the insurance . Often the owner is the insured and names a spouse the beneficiary . Life insurance purchasers are required to have an insurable interest in the life of the insured . Insurable interest generally must exist at policy inception . The underlying principle is that a purchaser must have a reasonable expectation of profit or benefit from the continued life of the insured . You have no limit on insuring your own life so you can name anyone as the beneficiary of your own policy . When you take out a policy on the life of another , there are limits on who can own the policy : 1 . Family members related by blood or marriage have an insurable interest in each other e.g. Parent/child and child by adoption , siblings , spouse , grandparents/grandchildren , and in some states , engaged couples . There is generally no insurable interest in nieces/nephews , cousins , aunts/uncles , other relative by marriage or stepparents/stepchildren . 2 . Creditors have insurable interest in a debtor to the extent of the debt . 3 . Business relationships which give rise to a financial dependency : an employee can insure an employer or vise versa . Partners can insured each other . Key employees can be insured by their employer . So , for example , two cousins who would otherwise not have an insurable interest , jointly own a business and therefore have an insurable interest in the other . The life insured always needs to consent with their signature and would need to consent by signature to the release and use of their medical information in the underwriting process for underwritten policies .
You can have two or more life insurance policies , but if you apply for a second or third policy , the life insurance company does ask if you have existing insurance . Why do they do this ? Because they want to make sure that you are financially qualified for the total amount of coverage that you will own . This is to protect the insurance carrier from unscrupulous persons who would try to gain excessive profit off the death of another , and from terrorists or other criminals who would try to use life insurance for money laundering . For the average person who simply wants more than one policy in order to get sufficient life insurance , or who wants to diversify their coverage between different companies , applying for and owning multiple policies is fine .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
Who `` needs '' life insurance coverage ? Anyone who has someone who would be financially adversely affected by their demise . That would include anyone upon whom the burden of final expenses would fall . This would also include creditors who would bear the unpaid balances on loans . A person who wants to leave a donation or legacy to a person or organization , but whose estate would fall short of the amount desired to be passed on would also fall into the category of one who needs life insurance coverage .
Life insurance can be used for many purposes : business succession , estate planning , charitable giving , key person coverage , etc. . Because it has so many great features , life insurance works well for many financial endeavors . But those who really need life insurance are those who have people who need them , who they would leave behind . Unless they have been able to save up hundreds of thousands of dollars in a short period of time , most people with spouses and/or children need life insurance .
It seems that your father bought an insurance policy for the purpose of you to have a policy of your own when you are no longer dependent under him . The decision will rely on who bought the policy and who was designated to pay for the policy which should have been your father since he opened up the policy . On the application will ask who is owner of policy and who will pay the premium . In insurance dependents are children of parents 25 and under . When a policy is taken out on child by a parent they receive lower rates , or even a rider which is an additional form that will cover all child dependents no matter the number until the age 25 . Once at that age they can become insured on their own policy at a guaranteed issue no matter what . In your case , you was not owner of policy , and you did not take over the policy . You dad owned the policy since he was the pay or even if the policy was written on you . You should have officially signed applications to own the policy , and it turned over to you . So , if not they have no course for action , since , you did not own the policy . You owe them nothing and you may cancel unless you voluntarily took over ownership . You may still cancel the policy anytime you desire . It also seems you have no beneficiaries . Also he may have taken the policy out on you in order to insure you in the event something happens to you which will relieve the financial burden upon the family .
Many people need life insurance . Studies show that many people know that they need life insurance . People who love someone else need life insurance to ease the pain of a premature death . People who owe money need life insurance to fulfill their obligations . People who are looking to the future need life insurance to protect their ability to obtain coverage . My favorite though , is wives need life insurance . They are so very important in a family and widowers have such a difficult time when they lose their wife .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Whole Life Insurance is not bad . It depends on who you are talking to and why they are saying that . WHole life provides a service . It gives a client a steady , non chaning premium each month ; it can last till age 100 ; it builds cash flow . It is what is called permanent coverae . Unlike term insurance , it doesnt change as you get older . Whole life is also very useful in providing key man insurance -LRB- insurance a company buys on top performers -RRB- and for those who may want to pay on their policies for a few years and then end up with a paid up policy . There can be many benefits to owning a whole life policy . Sadly there have been those in the marketplace selling and pushing only term insurance . Statistically people do better saving money as they pay their premiums on their insurance instead of `` investing the difference '' The onlyway to see which policy works in your bet interest is to meet with an agent who is not trying to sell you insurance ; rather meet with an agent who is working to provide you with the best insurance option for your particular situation and life goals ; you will be very happy you did !
Almost anyone can get life insurance . The only people who CAN NOT get life insurance are those who have serious health problems and who fall outside the age guidelines for guaranteed issue ; those who do not have any income at all -LRB- but even they may be able to get a policy with a cap on the face amount -RRB- ; and in the US , those who do not have citizenship , a green card , or work visa .
Because insurance primarily deals with `` pure risk '' , the chance of loss but not the chance for gain . The most effective way for a insurer toeffectivelymanage their own costs and to pay out on claims while still being profitable is through `` risk pooling '' which is the practice of grouping a large number ofhomogeneousand independent risks . By risk pooling those who subject the insurer to excessive claims should be off set by the policy holders who under use their policies . However the current market is notbalanced . . one of the goals of PPACA , therefore the majority of individuals who areseekinghealth coverage are the ones who are going to be mostlikelyto incur expensive claims . There are several other factors such as hospitals , when they extend charity care to poverty stricken individuals who need treatment they are forced to reconcile their budgets by charging more to the individuals who have the means to pay ... another area that PPACA aims to address .
Regardless of whether or not a life insurance agency advertises cheap life insurance , the reality is that all life insurance companies must charge you the same price , no matter where you purchased the policy from . However , there are some factors that enter into whether you will find a cheaper policy at one agency over another . Some of these agencies ' methods are positive , and some are negative . Here are some examples of both . Positive 1 -RRB- The insurance agency takes all your health details and shops among multiple carriers to find the one that will issue your policy at the cheapest price . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency will sell you a policy that suits your need , not pressuring you to buy a more expensive policy just because it makes them more money . 3 -RRB- The insurance agent will go to bat for you if you are rated unfairly , and strive to help you resolve that , or find you another policy , if possible . Negative 1 -RRB- The insurance agency offers you a short term policy , or accidental death policy , just to make the sale . They do this whether or not that type of policy best suits your need . 2 -RRB- The insurance agency neglects to ask pertinent health details and then offers you a cheap policy . Or else they ask health details but still claim to be able to get you impossibly low rates , often out of ignorance . Ironically , to get the cheapest life insurance , you need a life insurance agent who is `` valuable '' . Go to someone you trust to listen to you , who will shop your case among multiple carriers to find your best price , and who will not sell you something worthless just to save off a few dollars and make the sale . That way you will have a policy of value at the most affordable price .
There are `` life settlement '' companies who will buy some life insurance policies from those who no longer want or need their coverage . Most life insurance policies have no value to them , and therefore , are not `` sellable '' . The policies they are looking for are almost always permanent policies with cash value that is not in danger of running out due to increasing premiums . They also are looking for insured persons who have a short remaining life expectancy due to illness or old age . I have a questionnaire that can quickly determine if your policy is of interest to reputable life settlement companies , and will oversee the process , if interested .
Cash values life insurance can be a savings or investment policy depending upon which crediting method is used and how the policy is designed . There are three saving life insurance policies : Participating whole life insurance , current assumption universal life insurance and indexed universal life insurance . There is one investment life insurance policy that uses a crediting method of separate sub accounts with equity and bond allocations : Variable universal life . The performance of a life insurance policy as a savings or investment policy may depend on the policy design . That design must use the lowest cost of insurance death benefit option that complies with the TAMRA regulations to contain the policy expense . If designed correctly , life insurance can be a great savings or investment policy that can generate tax free retirement income as long as the policy is kept in force for the life of the insured .
Our agency and others who cater to `` impaired risk '' life insurance are the best resource for finding life insurance as a recovering alcoholic . By having a number of policies to shop from , you can find one that that will give you the lowest price at this point in your sobriety . Agencies like ours carry policies that are for those who have had treatment in the past year , with a lower price for those who have been out of treatment at least two years , and so on . After 10 years , most recovering alcoholics who have stayed sober during that entire time will have no problem getting a life insurance policy anywhere .
Yes , when someone gets life insurance on someone else , the person who purchased the policy is the policy Owner . The other person whose life is being insured , is called the Insured . It is the Owner who makes the decisions about the policy , such as naming the beneficiary , which bank account to pay the premium from , etc. . Obviously , you would want everything to be above board if you were going to be the Insured in a policy owned by someone else . One reason someone might want to own a policy on someone else 's life is if they would suffer a great loss if that person died . E.g. . The Insured owed the Owner a great deal of money , and the life insurance policy would repay that debt if the borrower died . Or the Insured owned the home where the policy Owner was living , and that policy would enable the policy owner to purchase the home when the Insured person died . Unless there is a very close family tie , this type of insurable interest in actually required in order to take out a life insurance policy on someone else .
Universal Life Insurance comes in several different types , and who the policy benefits depends on what type of Universal Life policy you get . Guaranteed no lapse UL usually has the lowest premiums of any permanent policy . That type of Universal Life benefits those with low incomes who still want the protection of lifelong coverage . Indexed Universal Life and Variable UL can be designed to provide tax deferred retirement income , or to borrow from for other needs . Universal Life , in general , is very flexible , so is ideal for a family who wants to simply adjust one policy throughout the stages of their life , rather than buy a new term or whole life policy whenever the need arises .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is Aetna Medicare Advantage Plan ?
This is a Medicare Advantage Plan offered by Aetna . Several companies offer Medicare Advantage Plans . Medicare Advantage Plans are compensated by Medicare to administer claims . They will pay instead of Medicare . As a result most Medicare Advantage Plans offer more benefits than Original Medicare . There is also far less out of pocket exposure . Medicare Advantage Plans , unlike Original Medicare , will have a network of doctors that you must utilize , similar to the networks under most group plans .
This is a Medicare Advantage Plan offered by Aetna . Several companies offer Medicare Advantage Plans . Medicare Advantage Plans are compensated by Medicare to administer claims . They will pay instead of Medicare . As a result most Medicare Advantage Plans offer more benefits than Original Medicare . There is also far less out of pocket exposure . Medicare Advantage Plans , unlike Original Medicare , will have a network of doctors that you must utilize , similar to the networks under most group plans .
It depends on the are you live in and your individual situation . Humana is a Medicare Advantage Plan . Each area is different . If you can not afford a Medicare Supplement then I would shop for a good Medicare Advantage Plan in your area , it may be Humana or it may be another plan such as United Health Care , Aetna , or Anthem Blue Cross . A good local agent who is certified in Medicare Advantage plans and is familiar with the plans in your area can help guide you in the right direction . Every situation is different . A medicare Advantage Plan will offer more coverage than original Medicare . A Medicare Supplement offers even better coverage because it will pay in addition to original Medicare . Humana does offer a Medicare Supplement , but make sure you shop because they may not be the best option depending on where you live . Again , a good local agent can be a great help to you .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
Absolutely !! There are Medicare Supplements offered through private insurance companies like Humana and Aetna that will help pay some of the costs not covered by Original Medicare or some supplements like a Plan F that covers everything that Medicare does not cover except of course prescription drugs . You still need a Part D prescription drug plan . The cost for a Medigap or a Medicare supplement can range from $ 50.00 to $ 350.00 at age 65 depending on the level of coverage you would like.Open enrollment which allows you to move in and out of these plans is Oct 15 to Dec 7th every year . Another option is getting a Medicare Advantage Plan , which is also offered by private insurance companies but most of the time there are plans available with a $ 0.00 monthly premium in addition to what they already take out of your check for part B. Instead of paying 20 % like Medicare , you pay low or no co-pays when you seek medical services . There are usually no deductibles on a Medicare Advantage Plan either . For more info please visit : rocoinsurance.com/medicare-products.html
I believe you 're referring to Medicare Part C . This is commonly known as Medicare Advantage and are purchased through private health insurance companies -LRB- e.g. Humana , United Healthcare , Aetna , etc. -RRB- . In short , plans operate similarly to traditional individual health plans for the under 65 market -LRB- e.g. having deductibles , copayments , coinsurance , max OOPs , etc. -RRB- . If you want to secure prescription coverage with an MA plan , you would want to look at MAPD plans -LRB- Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug plan -RRB- . Before buying an MA plan , it 's important to review the advantages and restrictions of this type of coverage and compare it to the costs and structures available through a Medigap plan and/or stand-alone Part D prescription plan . Everyone 's needs and budgets are different and therefore each type of program structure may be more suitable for one person than another . Consult with an experienced senior health insurance broker who can compare these options with you and help you figure out which program will be most suitable for your needs . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
On a side note to Mr. Vineyard 's answer which is great , once you receive the Medicare claim number which is usually your social security number with a letter behind it , this will allow you to sign up for a Medicare Advantage Plan . These plans are offered through private insurance company 's like Aetna , United HealthCare , and Humana and have to be at a minimum as good as original Medicare but these advantage plans almost always have added benefits such as dental , vision , and hearing that original Medicare does not have . Most company 's have several plans available at a $ 0.00 monthly premium in addition to your Part B premium . Original Medicare only covers 80 % and you pay 20 % . There are no co-pays .
Original Medicare pays 80 % for an MRI and you pay 20 % . Often times a Medicare Advantage plan from a private insurance company such as Aetna , application here WEBSITELINK , has small copay 's from $ 0 to $ 250 for a MRI . Medicare ADvantage plans must be at least as good as Original Medicare but most plans offer benefits such as dental , vision , and hearing at no additional charge .
Aetna is a stock life insurance carrier and as such has policyholders , not members . Aetna is a major insurance carrier involved in many areas of insurance and risk management . Aetna provides individual and group health insurance coverage . They also offer life insurance and Medicare plans . As such , Aetna has many hundred thousands of policyholders around the world .
AARP is a marketing organization aimed at `` seniors '' aged 50 and older . AARP has endorsed health insurance plans , including major medical for those under age 65 . In some areas the endorsed plan is underwritten by Aetna in 2013 . Compared to the Aetna plans available in the open market , you have only a few choices . AARP plans are essentially identical to those you can purchase from an insurance agent . Premium savings on the AARP plans are illusory . In order to create a lower premium some benefits are stripped from the plan vs those available in market Aetna plans . Any time you are shopping for insurance you should compare rates and benefits across a wide spectrum and not just assume plans endorsed by a marketing association or retailer are lower priced and better values .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Yes , Aetna 's Medicare Part D plans covers shingles vaccine . If you do not have a supplemental prescription drug plan or Medicare Advantage Plan , Medicare Part B does not cover the shingles vaccine , however . You must be sure to have your shot within your PPO , if specified , to save costs .
Generally AETNA health insurance plans cover acupuncture but only under specific circumstances -LRB- generally in lieu of using general anesthesia for a specific medical or dental procedure covered under the health insurance policy -RRB- and for relatively short list of medical situations such as lower back pain , migraines and a few other conditions . The list of conditions for which AETNA -LRB- or virtually any major medical insurance provider -RRB- will not cover acupuncture is far longer than the list of conditions that qualify . Before using acupuncture you should have your medical provider check with AETNA 's preauthorization department to determine if your specific condition will qualify for coverage and , if so , from what specific providers .
Hypnosis is not a covered benefit under Original Medicare . Having a Medicare supplement will not help either as Medicare Supplements will only cover services that Medicare approves . It would be theoretically possible there are some Medicare Advantage carriers that will cover Hypnotherapy but non of the more well know ones such as BCBS , United , Aetna , Humana will cover it .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Aetna is of excellent financial strength and personally a carrier I 've been placing clients in for years . They are rated A + on Standard & Poor 's and A with A.M. Best . That alone is a testament to their financial quality . Aside from the ratings , I have approx 250 individual clients placed on Aetna plans with little to no issues or problems . Excellent carrier that I highly recommend often . To get a quote with Aetna and other top rated carriers visit www.clminsure.com or call 561-320-2978
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
Please note , AARP is not an insurance company - they are a marketing organization that attaches their name to insurance products that are offered by carriers . If your AARP prescription coverage is under a Medicare type plan -LRB- Part D prescription drug plan or Medicare Advantage prescription drug plan -RRB- , then your insurance coverage would be through United Healthcare . If your AARP prescription coverage is under a individual health plan for persons under 65 , then your insurance coverage would be through Aetna . It 's fairly simple to find out if your specific health plan will cover Cialis - you can do so by either 1 -RRB- contacting your insurance provider and asking them if it should be covered under your plan -LRB- the contact number is generally on the back of your insurance plan ID card -RRB- , 2 -RRB- reviewing the list of drugs covered by a plan -LRB- its formulary -RRB- by checking on your online profile through the carrier 's website -LRB- if you have one -RRB- or in your policy , or by contacting your insurance agent who sold you the policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with any other insurance questions . Thanks very much .
In addition to what Bob has said , I would recommend picking up the excellent government booklet named Choosing a Medgap Policy . You can download it free from the Medicare website or order a paper copy free . Your Medicare Insurance broker can supply you with free copies of these as well . The chart on page 11 -LRB- of the 2012 version -RRB- makes it easier to understand what each Medicare Supplement Plan covers . The hardest thing for most people to accept at first is that the Lettered Plan is what makes the difference in your coverage NOT the brand of the insurance company you buy it from . People start out thinking that AARP 's plan is different from Gerber 's plan or Aetna 's plan . It 's hard for them to accept that the brand makes no difference . It 's the lettered plan that makes the difference . Once you choose which lettered plan you want , then you shop the different companies prices on the plan you choose . Your insurance broker should be able to show you the rates for all the companies that you want to consider .
The companies that sell Medicare Supplements -LRB- also known as Medigap -RRB- are numerous . Some of the main ones are Mutual of Omaha , ForeThought , Aetna , Anthem , Gerber , United Healthcare co-branded AARP , there are dozens and dozens of them . If you question is where do you look to buy a plan , you have several choices there too . You can call any of these companies directly or respond to their advertising and they will send out a sales representative either in person or to sell you over the phone . But there is a better way . You can use a Medicare Insurance Broker and sign up at the lowest price the plans are offered anywhere . You pay no fees to the broker . The advantage to you is you will get a knowledgable advisor that helps you understand your choices , shows you the current prices for all companies and most importantly , in the future when your rate goes up , his job is to get your rate back down . Your insurance broker will be the best free to you employee you have ever hired . People spend a tremendous amount of wasted money on Medicare insurance plans every year that they could have the exact same coverage plan for less if they understood how to do it . Your broker helps you with this and costs you nothing .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can You Cancel Car Insurance At Any Time ?
Yes , but there may be consequences . Some carriers prorate , others short-rate -LRB- meaning there is a penalty -RRB- and I imagine there are some that do n't refund at all . In addition , if you have a lienholder , your finance contract might have an insurance provision that requires you to purchase coverage for the vehicle OR they can `` force place '' coverage . This means that if you do n't buy the coverage stated in the contract , they will purchase the coverage and charge you for it .
Yes . You can cancel your car insurance at any time . The question that you may want to know before cancelling is whether your insurance company pro-rates or short-rates your cancellation . A pro-rated cancellation is more favorable for you since you are charged only for the days that have been used . In Illinois , the insurance companies by law have to pro-rate an auto cancellation .
If you mean can you cancel or change your car insurance , then the answer is yes , any time you like . Now , keep in mind that in most if not all states , you are required to have and maintain continuous car insurance that at least provides liability coverage in order to register a car . So , can you cancel your car insurance ? Yes , but unless you replace that coverage without any lapse , you may be in danger of being severly fined or at worst , have your car 's registration cancelled .
Most companies will allow you to cancel insurance at any time without penalty . Some charge what is known as a short rate cancellation that might reduce the amount of any unused premium . I assume that you are cancelling the policy because you no longer own the car . If you still own the car I recommend that you purchase comprehensive insurance if the car is less than 10 years old and will not be driven . That will pay for damages that occur to a non-operational vehicle like a tree falling on the car , or windstorm damage .
Homeowners Insurance can be cancelled at any time by the Insured . The Insured may be required to submit a signed request to cancel the policy ; it is important to purchase a new policy and make sure it is effective the same date as the cancellation of your old policy . All policies have a Standard Time of inception and expiration at : 12:01 a.m. . There is an online link available to obtain a quote and purchase Home Insurance directly online in multiple States . The link is : WEBSITELINK If the reason for changing carriers is due to an issue with an inspection which was conducted -LRB- interior or exterior -RRB- on your property , we must advise that all carriers are now inspecting risks which means you will most probably have the same issue with another carrier . On the other hand , an insurance carrier has legal restrictions regarding the cancellation of an insurance policy ; they may only cancel a policy for any underwriting reason during the first 60 days of a new insurance policy . They may cancel a policy at any time for non-payment of premium following the State requirement for legal notice .
You can cancel at anytime . it is not the best idea to go with out insurance . If you are canceling because the car is not running or you no longer own the car and are looking for a replacement that is different . If your car is no longer working you can place just comprehensive coverage on it and no liability while it is disabled that way it has some protection on your car . But on the flip side . If you no longer own a car you can keep the insurance till you get a replacement car and be covered if you are borrowing someone 's car and they did n't pay their insurance . Also there is the option of non owned policy . Also when you start your insurance up again if you have gone more then 30 days with no coverage your rates increase for lack of proof of prior . Talk to your agent and see what works best for you . If you are canceling because of your budget talk to your agent and see what they can do to keep you covered and at a better rate .
Yes , you can cancel your auto insurance policy at any time . If you bought the insurance through an agent , you can simply call them and tell them you need to cancel your policy . If you bought the insurance directly from the insurance company , you contact them . There are two considerations . The first has to do with the amount of premium refund you will get if you cancel the policy prior to the expiration date . In most states , if the insured cancels a policy before the expiration date , the return premium is calculated on what is known as a `` short rate '' basis . The short rate calculation may include an extra 10 % to the insurance company to cover the expense of cancelling the policy . The second consideration is whether the auto has a lien against it . If you still owe money on your car , your lender will require that you replace the cancelled insurance right away with a new policy . And you ca n't hide this from the lender because the insurer you cancel with automatically notifies the lender that the insurance has been cancelled .
Yes . You can cancel your car insurance at any time . The question that you may want to know before cancelling is whether your insurance company pro-rates or short-rates your cancellation . A pro-rated cancellation is more favorable for you since you are charged only for the days that have been used . In Illinois , the insurance companies by law have to pro-rate an auto cancellation .
The short answer is yes . It is important to keep in mind , however , that most States , like Connecticut where we are , require liabilityinsurance as a condition of maintaining registration . Thus , cancelling insurance on a car without cancelling the registration could result in a fine , a suspension of the registration or both . If you are financing a car , the finance company requires both Comprehensive and Collision coverage on that car , and if leasing , not only those but also liability protection and usually at a secific level of coverage . Cancelling insurance in a case such as those could result in your car being reposessed . An insurance company may also cancel a policy . These are usually `` non renewals ' of coverage as a result of the insured no longer meeting underwriting standards . Before you do anything , it is best to check with your Insurance Professional .
Any time that fraud is detected the insurance company can cancel an auto policy . If you stage an accident in order to file a claim , the company will probably cancel your policy . If new information comes to light that would change the nature of your application , that could lead to a cancellation . If you are arrested for transporting moonshine in your car , your auto insurance company will likely cancel your policy as soon as they find out . If you fail to pay the premium your policy can be cancelled .
An auto insurance policy can be cancelled at any time by you , or may be cancelled for non-payment by your insurance company . Your current provider will probably require proof of new insurance at the time of cancellation , as well as a signed request to cancel the policy if you are requesting the cancellation .
Yes , you can cancel life insurance at any time . With Term insurance there is no penalty for cancelling at any time , except for losing the coverage . With Whole or Universal Life , there is a surrender charge in the first years of the policy that will be deducted from any cash value you might have gotten back . If there is no cash value , you simply lose the policy . Keep in mind that , unless you paid extra at the start , the first years of the policy do not generally accumulate cash value as quickly as later . Talk over cancellation of your Whole or Universal Life with an agent who can explain the consequences and options for keeping it in some form . You may find that cancelling is not want to do , after all . Or you may have affirmation that you are doing the right thing .
Yes , you can . Most people assume they can only switch at renewal , but this is n't so . If you choose to switch , it 's not hard . When you find new coverage , go ahead and pay for it . Then you can cancel your current policy . They will refund the premium they have n't used . For instance , if you paid for the entire year and you cancel six months into the term , they 'll refund half the premium . Now some things to be aware of : Do n't cancel your current coverage until you have new coverage in place . If you have a mortgage , be sure to notify your mortgage company about the new coverage . They may send you a notice that they have no coverage and you need to address this or they will force coverage at an extremely high rate that only protects them , not you . Get this notice to your agent so they can get the mortgage company what they need . If you pay your insurance through your mortgage payment , it 's a little more complicated . When you closed on your mortgage , you paid the first year of insurance up front . Then , the mortgage company puts part of your payment into escrow for the insurance . When it renews , they 've collected enough to pay the full year again , and the process continues that way . If you cancel during the year , the refund will come directly to you , not the mortgage company , and your escrow may be short . So , you 'll have to pay the premium for the first year to give the mortgage company time to catch up . It 's your insurance and you can cancel any time you 'd like . Just be aware of some of the pitfalls that may exist . Find a good agent you can trust and they can take care of the whole process for you .
No . A health insurance company must provide a policyholder with proper advance notice of any policy cancellation . You should receive a written notification from your insurance carrier of their intent to cancel coverage , an explanation for the cancellation and the date that the policy will be terminated . Cancelling an individual or group health insurance policy is not something an insurance carrier can do arbitrarily and could get them in big trouble with the state insurance department and possibly the Federal government . Now , if you engaged in fraud in applying for a health insurance policy the insurance carrier is within their rights to cancel your policy and may even cancel it retroactively to the date of issuance . But they would still have to provide you with notice , an explanation and a chance to appeal the decision . An example that we will probably see more of in the era of ObamaCare where health insurance rates can be significantly different from one side of a state line to another is the situation where a person enrolls for coverage stating that they are a resident of a state like Tennessee -LRB- where more health insurance options exist and rates are lower -RRB- when they are really a resident of Arkansas -LRB- where choices are limited and rates are higher -RRB- . It is also possible that an insurance carrier will cancel an insurance policy product line , withdraw from a marketplace or go out of business , all of which are situations where an insurance carrier cancellation would be initiated by the insurance company . However , they are still required to provide policyholders with timely notice even in these events .
If in fact you have already purchased new car insurance with another company , then yes , you cartainly can request a cancellation of your previous policy . The old policy should be cancelled effective the date that your new policy went into effect . The request to cancel will be requested in writing for record purposes . YOu can talk to your new insurance professional about that . They will more han likely be able to prepare a standard form for your signature that stipulates the exact cancellation date . This will be signed by you then forwarded to your old carrier for processing . Any refund owed to you will be sent upon the processing of that cancellation .
If you cancel your car insurance you may be entitled to a refund , but you should discuss it with your Insurance Professional . The amount of refund will be dependent upon the amount you have paid and the length of time the policy has been in force . If , for example , you have a six month contract and have paid it in full , then if you cancel after three months you would receive about half of your money in return . Cancel after 5 months and you will receive about a month 's worth . If on the other hand you pay half and then choose not to pay your next quarterly installment , your policy 's grace period will kick in and you will continue to have coverage for a specified period of time . If you then cancel the policy while in that grace period , instead of a refund , you will owe for the extra coverage provided .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
First of all it depends if the policy was actually cancelled or was it simply non-renewed . There is a big difference as any company can choose to non-renew any policyholder for any reason they choose . When it comes to cancelling a policy there are rules and regulations that could vary from state to state as to the process and for what reasons they can cancel your policy . The short answer is , go buy a new policy from a different insurance company , however if it was cancelled due to misrepresentation or concealment you will need to be able to explain your position as most companies will ask if your policy was ever cancelled for one of these reasons .
Yes , you can cancel any insurance at any time ! The carrier may have restrictions on when and under what conditions a policy can be cancelled but an insured has no long term obligation to a policy . Please be cautious before cancelling a policy ; there have been many cases where an insured has cancelled a policy and has been unable to obtain insurance again for a variety of factors . It is a good idea to replace your coverage first unless you 're certain that you do n't want the insurance .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does Surrender Value Mean On A Life Insurance Policy ?
Great question ! The surrender value is what the insurance company gives you in cash , if you `` surrender '' the policy to them . That dollar figure can be reduced by what is called a surrender charge , if done in the early years of policy ownership . Once you have surrendered the policy , you no longer have coverage . Some companies will allow partial surrenders , but in most cases , it may be more advantageous to take out a loan against the policy -LRB- and keep the coverage -RRB- instead . If you would like help , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to be of assistance . Thanks for asking !
Surrender value is a feature of a cash value life insurance policy . These policies are normally called whole life although limited pay life policies have this feature . In order to provide a level death benefit for a level premium , the company collects more than is required in the early years of the policy to pay for the years when the cost exceeds the premium . These amounts are placed into reserves . At any given time following the first few years of the policy the company is willing to exchange the reserves for a release from paying the death benefit . These amounts can normally be taken in a variety of ways . See your trusted life insurance agent for a personalized discussion .
When talking about cash value in life insurance policies it is important to differentiate between the policy value and the surrender value . For example , in a universal life insurance policy the policy value -LRB- or fund value -RRB- would be the accumulated cash value which is earning interest . However , almost all universal life insurance policies have a decreasing surrender charge schedule . This means that if you were to surrender the policy in the early years the surrender charge could reduce most -LRB- or all -RRB- of the value you receive . The value you would receive is called the net surrender value , because it is net of all charges . At some point , say 10 or 20 years down the road , the surrender charges will go away and the policy value will equal the net surrender value . This is part of the reason why cash value life insurance should always be looked at as a long term proposition .
When you cancel your life insurance , what happens will depend on what type of policy you have . If you have Term Life insurance , the policy will simply end . You will not get any money back unless you had ROP Term -LRB- Return of Premium Term -RRB- and had kept the policy long enough that you are eligible to receive back part of the premiums you paid in . If you have a Permanent Life insurance policy that accumulated cash value , you will be able to receive the surrender value in cash . If you want to quit paying on your Permanent policy but do n't necessarily want to cancel your insurance , you could roll the surrender value over into another life insurance policy . Or you may have the option to change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , which means that it will be a smaller policy but you will not have to make any more payments to it . If you cancel a permanent policy in the first years , there will be a surrender charge that will reduce the cash value , and if you have loans against the policy , those will also be deducted from what you receive from the cash value , along with interest on the loans . You can request a current illustration to see what your Whole Life or Universal Life has for cash value , surrender charges and loan charges .
Cash surrender value in lie insurance is the amount of money you would walk away with if you decided to end a permanent policy before you passed away , or before the policy matured . Term life insurance does not have any cash value , so has no cash surrender value . In Whole Life or Universal Life , there is a surrender charge deducted from the cash value the first years , so there may be little or no cash surrender value until you have had the Whole Life or Universal Life policy for a few years . The amount of surrender value will depend on how you funded the policy , whether you had any loans out against it , policy performance , and length of time the policy was in effect .
This is more commonly known as a survivorship universal life -LRB- SUL -RRB- insurance policy - it 's different from an individual universal life insurance policy in that the policy insures the lives of two people -LRB- usually a husband and wife -RRB- . The policy proceeds are only paid out upon the death of the second insured . Many people use this type of policy for estate planning purposes . If your mother can not continue to make premium payments or does not want to , she can surrender the policy and take out the cash value -LRB- less any surrender charges , outstanding loans , or interest , if applicable -RRB- . There is also the option to let it run out on it 's own . When you no longer contribute premiums to the policy , it will steadily use up the cash value in the policy to continue the coverage until there is nothing left , at which the point the policy would `` crash '' on it 's own and no longer provide coverage . The third option is to change the structure of the policy . You may have the option to reduce the face amount of the policy -LRB- the death benefit -RRB- or reduce the length of coverage to lower the premiums to make the policy more affordable if cost is a concern . I would suggest your mother contact the agent on the policy and ask them to run midstreams to find out what the current values are on the policy , how long the coverage will go for on the guaranteed side and current assumption side of the program and what changes would it make to the policy given the above options . This will provide a good indication as to what course of action would be most appropriate . Guaranteed side means how long will the coverage be guaranteed for at the absolute minimum with a given program structure . Current assumption side means how long will the coverage go for given today 's values .
That is a great question ! The surrender value is the money that the insurance company returns to you if you were to cancel or `` surrender '' the policy before it reaches it 's expected end . Term life policies will have no surrender value , as they have no value unless they pay out . Whole life policies build a cash value , and it is from this that your returns come . The surrender value is nearly always less than the cash value , as the company will collect fees and charges from that value before releasing it to you . Your policy paperwork will usually list the surrender value . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
When you say NWML , I assume you are referring to Northwestern Mutual Life . Since I 'm not a NWML agent , it 's hard to comment on the specifics of the carrier 's product , but can hopefully provide some general insight for this type of program . These types of policies typically feature a combination structure of part whole life and part term insurance . Whole life insurance can not be converted to an annuity , nor can term life insurance . If the policy was surrendered for the cash value of the whole life side of the policy -LRB- term life insurance does not build cash value -RRB- , the monies could be used towards an annuity . Please note , if there is a loan -LRB- and any interest on the loan -RRB- on the policy , any remaining surrender charges , the dollar amount you receive can be lower than the policy 's cash value -LRB- think : cash value - loans - interest on loans - surrender charges = amount you actually receive -RRB- . Also , you may want to verify whether there would be a taxable gain on the policy before surrendering it -LRB- the cash value in the policy exceeds the premiums paid into it -RRB- . Also , the only way a whole life insurance policy pays a dividend to the policyowner is if the policy is a participating whole life policy -LRB- non-participating policies do not offer any dividend structure - only the build-up of cash value -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The surrender value of life insurance is the amount that the policy owner would receive if they terminated their cash value policy . There is only a surrender to permanent policies -LRB- Whole or Universal Life -RRB- ; there is no surrender value to Term Insurance policies . The surrender value is the cash value minus any surrender charges or fees that are charged .
When you surrender your life insurance policy , your coverage ends and you stop paying premiums . The insurance company will pay the cash surrender value of the policy which will take a week or two . The cash surrender value is less than the total cash value in the early years of a policy due to a surrender charge which is usually a charge that decline to zero over a period of 5-20 years , depending on the policy . Any policy loans outstanding also reduce the cash value . If you have any gain in the policy - cash surrender value less premiums - then it will be taxable as income .
The policy owner can surrender their cash value policy and the insurance company will give them the cash surrender value net of any policy loans or surrender charges . As life insurance is property , the policy owner may sell their life insurance policy . This has developed in recent years into a secondary market for unwanted or unneeded life policies called life settlements . Not all policies are valued higher than the cash surrender value . To find out more , ask your life insurance professional for guidance in this area . Family members or charities may also be potential new owners for life insurance you might currently own . There may be planning and/or tax advantages to consider . Again , check with a life insurance professional or your tax adviser for more information .
The net cash value on a life insurance policy is the net cash value you would receive if you surrendered your policy . -LRB- Not including tax if applicable -RRB- With whole life policies this is the sum of the guaranteed cash value plus any dividends less any indebtedness . With Universal life policies , there is often a surrender charge for the first number of years . So the net cash surrender value would be calculated as cash value less loans and surrender charge -LRB- if applicable -RRB- . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The policy-owner can either contact the agent or the insurance company directly to request the company 's surrender forms . At the same time , request a policy value quote to ensure there will be no surprises when you receive the payment . Not all whole life policies have surrender charges but , if so , and if the policy is still in the surrender period , the cash value will be reduced by a surrender charge -LRB- charge for early penalty -RRB- . The cash value may be further reduced by any outstanding policy loan . If the cash value does not exceed the cumulative premiums paid into the contract , there should n't be any taxable issues .
Life Insurance Cash Surrender Value is what will be returned to you if you cancel a permanent life insurance policy that has a cash value available . This surrender value may be less than the actual cash value as all loans will be paid back & surrender fees will be taken . Beware , if the surrender value is more than the money or premium you have paid in , there may be a taxable event you will have to deal with .
I am sorry to hear about your financial difficulties . Before surrendering your Whole Life Policy please consider that you will no longer have coverage and if you were to apply in the future the cost will be more than what you are locked into now . That said , you may have some options available to you . First , have you considered just withdrawing or taking a loan from the cash value ? This way the policy will still be in force . Be sure to understand what the surrender value is as well on the policy . It may mean you will get less out of the policy than what you were thinking . Please consider what will happen if death was to occur in the next 5 years , 10 years , etc. and what financial situation this may put you in . I would recommend contacting your Broker/agent to discuss your options . If you do not have one , I would be more than happy to look over what you have and make any recommendations based on what your needs are and what is available from the policy . This is a free service . Feel free to contact me at : mattb@denverwestip.info or call me at -LRB-720-RRB-708-5498 .
Answers above are correct , but thought you might like to know that 1 . The column that is usually titled `` Account Value '' is the cash value that is usually used by the carrier to determine the amount of loanable money the policyowner may borrow . 2 . When the cash value in the `` surrender value '' column equals the `` Account Value '' , it indicates that the surrender period or charges are no longer part of the cash value equation . However , if a loan is still outstanding , the surrender charge period could be over , but the loan would be reflected in a surrender charge lower than the account value .
The cash value of your life insurance policy is actually a reserve build up inside the policy . Most permanent life insurance plans accumulate cash reserves that can be borrowed by the policy owner . Cash value policies also have surrender values and maturity or endowment values . If you decide to surrender your policy the carrier will send you a check representing the accumulated cash value of your policy and , in some cases , a termination dividend . If you keep the policy long enough until it endows , usually at age 100 , the policy is surrendered by the carrier and a check for the maturity value of the policy .
The Cash Surrender Value is the value of the policy if you surrendered the policy . This is different than the face amount . You can find a table of Guaranteed Surrender Values inside your policy . A Whole Life Policy will have several provisions designed to give you options should your economic situation change . You may borrow off the Cash Value if you need to . You can use the Cash Value to provide a reduced paid up insurance policy . You can allow the policy to pay for extended term insurance , which keeps the policy going until the cash value is used up . This is a big advantage in my opinion over other life insurance policies .
Yes as long as there is loan value in the policy . A life insurance cash value is divided into two parts , the Surrender Value and the Loan value . The Surrender Value is the money you would receive if you cash in or surrender your policy . The insurance is no longer in force . The Loan value is the amount of money you cn loan on the policy . The insurance remains in force and if death occurs the loan amount is subtracted from the death benefit . The loan amount is sometimes different from the surrender amount due to administration charges that may be built into the policy . You can not borrow the full face amount of the policy .
For permanent life insurance , the policy owner has the right to borrow from the cash value subject to the terms in the contract . So , the owner can borrow life insurance cash values , even prior to age 59-1/2 , without a tax penalty as it is not a distribution . Loans will reduce the policys death benefit and cash value available for use . But use care here since if the policy lapses or is surrendered in full while there is an outstanding loan the amount of the outstanding loan is taxable to the extent that the policy 's gross cash value exceeds the policy owner 's basis -LRB- sum of premiums paid -RRB- in the contract . Policies that have a cash surrender value and have been in force for awhile have a maximum loanable value of close to the cash surrender value . Your annual statement may also have the value for loan purposes . Policies vary widely and there are many factors to consider . The best way to get a current value is to contact your life insurance professional or the insurance company directly .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Should Be Included In Your Retirement Plan ?
Each person 's retirement plan is different . The makeup should be based on what defined pensions -LRB- if any -RRB- you have along with what other sources you are utilizing . Naturally , a matching 401K is a great foundation along with other diversified safe assets . A full-time financial planner or broker -LRB- not marketers , advertisers , media persons or unlicensed representatives -RRB- will offer some great ideas including what mutual funds -LRB- if any and why -RRB- should be used , annuities , bonds or other investment instruments .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
A retirement plan can be a deductible qualified or nondeductible non-qualified plan , generally consisting of annuities and life insurance . The retirement plan should have a future estimated year for the beginning of retirement as well as a life expectancy year for death . The retirement plan should reflect the personal financial profile of the plan participant which includes risk tolerance , product suitability and the established timeline as cited above . Product diversity should be a consideration when assigning the allocation of the plans product holdings .
In order to determine what is the best retirement plan , you first need to clarify what you are trying to accomplish . What does a successful retirement look like for you ? Once you have an idea what that means then you will be able to calculate what it will cost to fund it . The would will be able to determine what is best for you . Additional information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
In Canada a Registered Retirement Savings Plan , RRSP is a tax sheltered savings plan that is not taxed while funds are inside the plan only when they are withdrawn . You are permitted to deduct your contributions to an RRSP up to a yearly limit -LRB- $ 24,270 in 2014 -RRB- . You can make contributions to your own plan , your spouse 's and that of your common law partner.Your individual contribution limit is included on your Notice of income Tax Assessment including an accumulated total of unused contributions that are carried forward . You are required to start taking an income from the plan not later than December 31 in the year in which you turn 71 . The income will be taxable . Different products or vehicles or accounts are eligible to be registered including mutual funds , segregated funds -LRB- Variable annuities -RRB- , stocks and GIC 's . This is a very basic summary . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
How much can I borrow from my retirement plan ? Now if I could flick your ear like your dad used to do , I would say `` why would you want to ? '' Just because a loan provision can be included within your plan , it does n't mean you should exhaust EVERY other possibility first . Borrowing from your retirement plan is far and away the last possible choice to make . That said ... The limits for loans can be set by your plan . Borrowing provisions can be set up by your plan . Payback interest rate is set up by your plan . Your plan advisory board will decide if a loan request has merits . Usually the money you take from your plan is no longer participating in plan returns , so if you 're investment is earning 10 % and your loan payback provision is 4 % , you 're making 4 % on your money . If you get laid off or quit your job , your loan from your retirement plan is `` called '' immediately . Failure to pay it back when called results in a `` premature distribution '' which makes your `` loan '' income , along with a penalty , so your income taxes could change considerably . Try to remember just because a feature is available , does n't mean you should use it .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
First establish your time to retirement , how long until I retire ? Then create an investor profile to establish your risk tolerance . What is the beta -LRB- volatility -RRB- of the investment youre considering ? Then estimate you income tax as a percentage of your gross income . What was your gross , what do you actually pay the IRS . This helps determine if you should use a qualified plan . You should probably use a qualified plan if your employer matches your contributions . Diversification is a key component of constructing a retirement plan . Diversification in your investment portfolio . Diversification in short , midterm and long investment periods . Diversification in taxation : taxable , tax deferred and tax free . This all matters when you take distributions from your retirement plan later in life .
Selecting the best retirement plan is determined by your personal financial profile . First consideration is whether the plan should be qualified or non-qualified . If your tax bracket is high and/or your employer matches some of your contributions , a qualified plan should be considered . If your tax bracket is low and your employment doesnt offer a match then non-qualified plan should be considered . Once you establish whether the plan should be qualified or non-qualified , then funding your retirement with the proper product is next . To do this you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes a risk tolerance assessment , your financial goals and a life expectancy review .
I should preface this by saying you should explore alternatives before you do surrender a retirement plan since in addition to lost savings there are tax consequences . In Canada , whether you can cash in you retirement plan depends on what type of plan you have . Individual Registered Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- can be surrendered . Group Pension Plans can not be surrendered while you are part of the plan . When you leave the plan whether you can access funds or are required to transfer to a locked in RRSP depends on a number of factors . It depends . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
A Registered Retirement Plan is a plan that as the name suggests is designed for retirement savings . The usual attributes include deductibility of contributions and tax deferred grow while in the plan . Withdrawals from the plan are usually taxable . There are different types of plans available . In Canada for example , Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSP -RRB- are available on an individual or group basis . You can make the contributions for you own plan or to a plan for your spouse -LRB- It is an irrevocable gift -RRB- . Registered Pension Plans are also available with the employer making some or all of the contributions . In addition , the Tax Free Savings Account -LRB- TFSA -RRB- does not offer tax deductibility of contributions , however the funds grow tax free and the withdrawals do not attract taxation . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
In order to determine how much you need to save for retirement , you first need to define what a successful retirement means to you . The next step is to do a budget to determine what is needed to finance your desired lifestyle . This is a better approach than simply randomly choosing a % of your current income . There are calculators available on many websites to help you determine how much you will need to save to generate a specific retirement income . Given the complexity of retirement planning though , you would be best served working with a financial or retirement planner . There are resources and additional information on Retirement Planning on my website , www.jpw.ca . It includes a Retirement Planning Checklist that will save you time and money . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Would You Be Turned Down For Life Insurance ?
It really depends on the company , but there are a number of parameters that can prevent a person from qualifying for life insurance . There are a number of insurers for example that will insure people up the the age of 90 ... not very many , but there are a few . Most will not insure people over the age of 80 no matter how good their health is . The mortality tables just place them at the high end of risk for death and therefore not a good investment for the insurance company . Most health conditions are not complete blocks to getting insurance , but may well be rated and therefore require a higher premium . Most insurers will not insure a convicted felon until they have fulfilled their parole requirements . Even then some companies will not take the risk . If a person 's occupation and or avocation is considered too high a risk , that may cause some insurance companies to decline issuing a policy .
There are a variety of reasons why an applicant can be turned down . The leading cause of declination is poor health . Another reason for declination could be substance abuse and/or addiction to drugs or alcohol . Your motor vehicle driving record could contain multiple traffic violations , even DUI . What could be a hobby for some , will be too great a risk for the life insurance company like cliff diving or deep sea scuba . Underwriting may deem that the life insurance cant be justified on the basis of the proposed beneficiary or that the amount of coverage is not warranted . These are just a few of the possible scenarios that could cause your application for life insurance to be turned down .
There is actually a whole list of why a person can be turned down for life insurance . Life insurance is a risk based product . Meaning an insurance company is willing to `` bet '' on your mortality and they are very good at it . They will promise you a rate for a given time period they are willing to accept in exchange for a large lump sum face amount paid to your beneficiary . Because of this risk their underwriters will look at very aspect of your life starting withage , build , occupation , life style , health status , geography , drug use and nicotine use to determine this risk . If any one of the aspects is outside of their risk tolerance then the person is declined for life insurance .
Yes , you can turn down Medicare . If you are automatically enrolled in Medicare , you will receive a form in your packet that you can simply return to turn down Medicare Part B due to being in a group plan . You will need to contact your Social Security office to discuss the ramifications of turned down Medicare Part A . But you can turn down Part A , as well .
Yes , you can turn down Medicare . However , with no premium for Medicare Part A , and in consideration of the valuable health care that it provides , one should give very careful consideration before turning down Part A. Part B is not needed if you are still working and receiving group health insurance , so it can be turned down and picked up later . Again , to turn it down permanently , first look hard at the benefit it provides , and the alternatives , before making that decision .
There are a variety of reasons why an applicant can be turned down . The leading cause of declination is poor health . Another reason for declination could be substance abuse and/or addiction to drugs or alcohol . Your motor vehicle driving record could contain multiple traffic violations , even DUI . What could be a hobby for some , will be too great a risk for the life insurance company like cliff diving or deep sea scuba . Underwriting may deem that the life insurance cant be justified on the basis of the proposed beneficiary or that the amount of coverage is not warranted . These are just a few of the possible scenarios that could cause your application for life insurance to be turned down .
You can be turned down for a Medigap Policy . If you are in your Open Enrollment Period -LRB- new to Medicare -RRB- or if you can qualify for Guarantee Issue you can not be turned down regardless of your health . If you are not in Open Enrollment or Guarantee Issue you have to answer all health questions on the application so the insurance company can determine if you qualify medically for their Medigap Policy . If you have serious health conditions you can be turned down or you could be charged a much higher premium for the coverage because of the pre-existing health conditions .
There are a number of reasons to be turned down for life insurance . I have elaborated on them in my article here , along with ways to avoid or correct each problem : WEBSITELINK In summary , they are : 1 -RRB- The product does not cover your health condition or other risk factor -LRB- such as suspended drivers license , recent bankruptcy , dangerous hobby -RRB- 2 -RRB- Your application is incomplete and no one points it out to you 3 -RRB- Something is in your medical records that you are unaware of , that causes you to be declined 4 -RRB- The underwriter asks for more medical records and no one provides them 5 -RRB- You have done everything right but your health does not meet the qualifications Being turned down is a frustrating , heart wrenching experience . You can lessen your chances of being turned down by using an agent or agency that understands your health and risk factors and puts you with the correct product to start with , then follows the underwriting process closely to make sure it is completed properly . Sometimes , though , in trying to get the best price , declines do happen . It is not the end of the world . There is usually something else out there for you . Find yourself an agent who vows to stay the course with you until you get what you need .
Unfortunately , some people are turned down for life insurance for very simple reasons because they did not sign up for the appropriate policy to start with . To avoid being turned down , be sure to read the guidelines very carefully . It is far better to converse with an agent to be sure you did not overlook something . E.g. . Some policies require that you have a drivers license ; some do n't . Some require that you are a US citizen ; some do n't . Some allow a certain policy to cover people with diabetes ; some do n't . Those type of declines are easy to avoid by just talking to tan agent . Other declines are more complicated . You may have a history of depression that sounds OK , but then get declined because your doctor wrote something in your medical records of which you were unaware . With any kind of health history or risk factors such as past alcohol treatment , use an impaired risk specialist to lower your chance of being turned down . There are policies out there for nearly everyone if you know where to look .
No , enrollment in Part B Medicare is not mandatory . Some people put off enrolling in Medicare Part B until the next enrollment period -LRB- or more -RRB- after their 65th birthday because they are receiving good health insurance through the group plan offered at their place of employment . If you are enrolled in Part B Medicare automatically when you turn age 65 , you can turn it down . But do know the consequences of turning down Part B beforehand .
In some states , you are allowed to change Medigap plans at any time , without being asked any medical questions . However , in most states , if you are applying outside of your initial enrollment period -LRB- six months after you first get Medicare part B -RRB- , then you will have to qualify medically in order to switch Medigap policies . This means answering health questions on the insurance company application , and usually also involves a phone interview with you and verify your prescription drugs . In most cases , if you answer yes to any of the health questions being asked , you would not be approved by that particular company . That said , not all companies ask the same health questions , so being turned down by one company does not mean you would be turned down everyone .
Guaranteed Health Insurance means that if you apply for health insurance you can not be turned down because of any medical issues or pre-existing conditions . Prior to January 1 , 2014 if you applied for individual health insurance , in most states , you were medically underwritten and could be turned down , declined , or rates up 50-100 % over the standard rates . Guarantee issue means all insurance carriers must accept you .
If you are receiving Social Security benefits at age 65 , you will be signed up for Medicare Part A and Part B automatically . When you get the packet in the mail , you will have a form that you can use to turn down Part B . At this time you can also opt out of Part A , but it is free and covers very expensive hospitalization costs , so you would be advised to keep it , or have very other good health insurance if you turned it down . If you are not yet receiving Social Security benefits at age 65 , it is not mandatory to apply for Medicare Part A or B at that time . However , it is again , advisable to at least get Part A .
In addition to a credit check , insurance companies will also receive a report from a company that keeps track of insurance claims from almost all companies . If you have filed a claim or received a moving violation , the information will be reported to this agency . This is done to help insurance companies accurately assess each individual . If you are turned down for insurance based on information provided by the agency , you have the right to the a report , just as if you are turned down for credit .
Sometimes people are turned down for life insurance for very benign reasons , such as , they did not fit the age guidelines for a certain face amount . Sometimes the reasons for being denied are more involved , such as their blood sample showed that they may possibly have diabetes without knowing it . If you are turned down , contact your agent to see if he/she knows the reason for your decline . If you can not get the answer that way , you are free to contact me . I can usually figure it out by asking a few questions , and can find the lowest priced policy for which you do qualify .
Why were you turned down for life insurance ? There could be numberous reasons or just one . If you were declined you should have been notified of the decline and advised to your rights to appeal the decision . Life insurance underwriting looks at your medical history , your current health , your driving record , your credit history and other things health and financial . You should have received a letter .
There is actually a whole list of why a person can be turned down for life insurance . Life insurance is a risk based product . Meaning an insurance company is willing to `` bet '' on your mortality and they are very good at it . They will promise you a rate for a given time period they are willing to accept in exchange for a large lump sum face amount paid to your beneficiary . Because of this risk their underwriters will look at very aspect of your life starting withage , build , occupation , life style , health status , geography , drug use and nicotine use to determine this risk . If any one of the aspects is outside of their risk tolerance then the person is declined for life insurance .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
You can still be turned down for health insurance and it happens each day . There are many non-Exchange plans that are offered by major insurers that are medically-underwritten . For example , short-term -LRB- temporary -RRB- medical coverage is available fro many large reputable carriers . UnitedHealthcare markets this type of plan under `` Golden Rule . '' It 's a very popular and cheap health insurance plan that can be purchased for up to 6-12 months . Although there are only a few medical questions , you can be denied coverage if you have been treated for a major illness -LRB- cancer , heart disease , diabetes etc. . . -RRB- or you have previously been turned down for coverage . If this happens to you , do n't miss the next Open Enrollment which allows you to apply with a subsidy that could lower your rate . Limited-Benefit plans are also a less-popular option . As an experienced broker -LRB- 33 years -RRB- , our job is to provide accurate information and the lowest available rates .
Unfortunately , the Affordable Care Act does not make it easier to buy a Medigap Plan . If you have a pre-existing health condition , the insurance companies can turn you down . Therefore , the best time to buy a Medigap plan is when you think you do n't need one . If you are over 65 and out of your initial Open Enrollment Period , you will have to answer the health questions on the Medigap application . Each insurance company is unique with their health questions -- as is each person with their health history . While one insurance carrier might deny you for having rheumatoid arthritis , another insurance company may approve your application . That is why it 's a great idea to work with a Medicare Supplement specialist . In just a few minutes , we can review your health history and determine which insurance companies may be the best match for you . If I can assist you with your personal Medigap needs , please feel free to contact me .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does State Farm Auto Insurance Cover Rental Cars ?
State Farm auto insurance policies will provide a substitute transportation benefit -LRB- rental cars -RRB- in the event of an accident or covered claim . You may have to add a rider to the policy to obtain that coverage . When you are driving that replacement vehicle , many of the benefits of your own State Farm vehicle transfer to the vehicle you are renting . Of course , you should always check with an experienced car insurance broker for specific information , and you wish , free quotes from multiple carriers .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
State Farm auto insurance policies will provide a substitute transportation benefit -LRB- rental cars -RRB- in the event of an accident or covered claim . You may have to add a rider to the policy to obtain that coverage . When you are driving that replacement vehicle , many of the benefits of your own State Farm vehicle transfer to the vehicle you are renting . Of course , you should always check with an experienced car insurance broker for specific information , and you wish , free quotes from multiple carriers .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
While it may be true your own liability , comprehensive and collision coverage may extend to cover you when renting a car , most of the rental agreements I have read make the renter responsible for expenses not covered by most auto insurance policies . In addition to the responsibility for the deductible , most rental companies make you reimburse them for the loss of value to their damaged car , the revenue they lose while the car is out of service and even the administrative costs they incur having the car repaired . These costs are not covered by most auto insurance policies . Remember you gave them your credit card and permission to put those charges right on your card . That might make your trip one you will remember ! And the damage to the rental car might not even be your fault ! Unless you have a good personal umbrella policy without a following form auto limitation and/or personal property care custody or control exclusion , I suggest you consider buying the damage waiver rental companies offer . The price is ridiculously high but it avoids an argument with a big company who would have your money and doesnt like to give it back . If more people would read the rental agreement and object to accepting responsibility for these costs , maybe the rental companies would remove these indemnity clauses for many of their good repeat rental customers . Until then it may be a matter of Pay me now or Pay me later .
The insurance company you currently have your auto insurance with may extend coverage to a rental car . If so you do have the option of waiving the coverage offered by the rental car agency . I recommend you contact your agent to verify if your coverage applies to a rental car since not all polices will extend to rental cars . Also depending on the state you are in there are advantages of purchasing the rental cars insurance . For example if you have a solo car accident the damage will be picked up by the rental car agency and not your own insurance carrier thereby avoiding any potential points that may apply . But again , I strongly suggest you contact your agent if you are not sure that your current insurance carrier will extend coverage to a rental car .
Without specifics , `` it depends ... '' on what state the policy is written in . I am in New York and the NY Personal Auto Policy is required -LRB- by statute -RRB- to have some type of `` Rental Vehicle Coverage Endorsement ' . It is not optional . The endorsement sets forth an Insuring Agreement , Definitions , Priority of Payment , Exclusions , Subrogation , Duties after an Accident or Loss , and General Provisions . Coverage for the actual damage to or loss ofthe rental vehicle -LRB- with limitations -RRB- is provided ` regardless of fault . ' The endorsement does not set forth value or limit . Theoretically , I can rent a Rolls Royce , total it , and my carrier most likely pays the rental company the $ 350,000 value of the car including loss of use . My NY Rental Vehicle Coverage does not pay the ` reduction/diminution in value of the vehicle ' in the event it is repairable - thiscoveragecannot be added to my policy . Diminution of Value coverage is available through the physical damage insurance offered by the rental company -LRB- aka the collision damage waiver , etc -RRB- . A thorough reading of an Erie Personal Auto Insurance policy issued in your state is warranted as my answer only applies to theNew York Personal Auto Policy . Commercial or Business auto policies address rental vehicles in a different manner - a topic for a separate question .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Always check with your insurance professional before renting a car . Generally speaking , unless you have special limits found in a non standard policy , the coverage you have on your personal auto policy does extend over to rental cars while they temporarily replace yours . Keep in mind , though that if you have an older car , for example , and are not carrying Collision on your policy , you will not have collision on the rental . The Liability coverage you have transfers fully , but comp and collision only transfer if you have them . Remember though that I referred to a rental car . This extension of coverage does not necessarily include rental vans or trucks used for moving or hauling.One other thing to keep in mind . Many credit card ccontracts provide some limited coverage if used when renting a car.This is usually up to $ 500.00 which may be enough to cover the deductible from your personal auto policy .
If you have a personal auto coverage and you rent a car your existing auto policy will cover you in the rental car , but if you have an accident you will have to pay your normal deductible . The rental car companies make a LOT of money from selling really overpriced insurance and in general it 's a good idea to just say no as long as you do have a personal auto policy . If you do n't have a personal auto policy then you do need to get the rental insurance to at least have the legally required liability coverage . Many credit cards also provide you some rental car insurance for free , so check with your credit card company too .
Yes , State Farm does offer life insurance . However , I have some clients who bought State Farm life insurance and then ended up buying different policies because they were much less expensive . Shopping for life insurance with an independent agent like myself gives you access to over 70 A rated or better life insurance companies . Many of these life insurance companies offer policies less expensive than State Farm and they may be less restrictive when it comes to certain health conditions . If you use State Farm for your other insurance needs , I would highly recommend you shop your life insurance with an independent agent because you will most likely save a significant amount of money .
Rental car insurance is available from rental car agencies . If you own an insured car the insurance from that car extends to a rental car which means that purchasing the coverage from the rental agency is not necessary . If you do not own a car , it is possible to purchase non-owned auto insurance which would eliminate the requirement for buying liability insurance from the rental agency . You would still need physical damage coverage .
Currently , the largest US auto insurance company is State Farm , assuming we use written premiums as the criteria . State Farm has offices throughout the US . Following State Farm is Warren Buffet 's Berkshire Hathaway -LRB- Geico and other companies -RRB- , Allstate , Progressive , Farmers and USAA . Of course , these rankings change fairly often . In fact , Berkshire just recently passed Allstate for the Number 2 position . Many local companies in your area may not be the biggest carriers , but still write a lot of local business . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker since 1980 and owner of several top-rated websites that offer the lowest available rates .
Yes , the Farm Bureau does offer life insurance . You can contact your state Farm Bureau to find an agent . Or you can get a quote via the internet from United Home Life , of whom the parent company is United Farm Family Life Insurance Co , which operates as a subsidiary of the Indiana Farm Bureau . UHL provides life insurance in most states .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
State Farm does have Disability Insurance that it offers for purchase . Their plans include regular Disability Insurance that pays a benefit to the disabled person to be used as they wish , which State Farm calls Disability Income Insurance . State Farm also offers Mortgage Disability Income Insurance and Individual Credit Disability Income Insurance .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Cover CPAP Machines ?
Medicare will cover a three month trial for a Cpap machine for those on Medicare who are diagnosed with sleep apnea . It is covered under Medicare Part B . If the machine works to alleviate signs and symptoms of sleep apnea , Medicare may cover the Cpap machine rental for a longer period of time . Once you have rented the machine for 13 months , you own it .
Medicare will cover a three month trial for a Cpap machine for those on Medicare who are diagnosed with sleep apnea . It is covered under Medicare Part B . If the machine works to alleviate signs and symptoms of sleep apnea , Medicare may cover the Cpap machine rental for a longer period of time . Once you have rented the machine for 13 months , you own it .
I am having a hard time finding a definitive answer to this question . It appears that Medicare can replace a Cpap machine every 5 years , but it is not clear whether there has to be justification for it -LRB- i.e. a new model would more effectively treat the sleep apnea , etc -RRB- . If a Cpap machine is replaced , it is called a restart , and the machine is rented for the first year before becoming the property of the Cpap user .
If your doctor certifies that you have sleep apnea that can not be treated with other protocols and you need a cpap machine , Medicare will pay for the rental of a cpap machine . Your doctor must have documented a sleep study where your nightly sleep patterns were monitored . Medicare will cover a 90 day rental . After 90 days your doctor must recertify the need for the machine .
Yes , Medicare will cover Cpap supplies for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea . When first being evaluated , Medicare will pay for three months of Cpap usage and supplies on a trial basis . Once it it determined that obstructive sleep apnea is the cause of sleep symptoms , and that Cpap therapy works in alleviating those symptoms , Medicare will extend the coverage period for which they will pay for Cpap machine and supplies .
Medicare will cover Cpap therapy when medically necessary . If diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea , Medicare will pay for a three months trial of Cpap to see if it is effecting in treating the sleep apnea . If it is , Medicare will extend the coverage to 13 months , after which you will own the Cpap machine .
CPAP machines are used to treat some forms of sleep apnea . Before Medicare will authorize a CPAP your doctor must submit a CMN -LRB- certificate of medical need -RRB- . You must have had a sleep study conducted by a Medicare approved facility and you must have had training on the use and care of the CPAP .
If you have been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea , you can claim the Cpap rental as Medicare expense , if the Cpap therapy is found to be medically necessary for treatment of your sleep apnea . After 13 months of renting the Cpap machine , you normally will own the machine , but still can be reimbursed for Cpap supplies .
If you qualify , Medicare will pay for the rental of a CPAP machine . You must have been seen by a doctor , and that doctor must have prescribed a sleep study . The study must be conducted by a Medicare approved facility and your diagnosis must be confirmed . You must have been trained on the care and use of a CPAP before Medicare will cover the rental .
Medicare will cover treatment of sleep apnea , including a CPAP if justified as medically necessary . You must have been examined by a doctor and have a confirmed diagnosis of apnea . Your doctor must have prescribed a sleep test and the study must confirm the diagnosis . Medicare will pay for rental of a CPAP machine if you qualify .
Your health insurance plan will most likely cover a CPAP machine provided you meet the criteria of their guidelines . Every plan is different , but the process is similar . You must have had a consult with your PCP who refers you to a sleep study program . The results of your sleep study must be presented to your carrier along with a doctors diagnosis of sleep apnea and a recommendation for a CPAP
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Can I get life insurance if I have sleep apnea ? Well the answer is many times yes , but I need to know some answers to some questions . Are you using a CPAP machine , or a BiPAP machine , as well as what 's your height and weight , and have you used tobacco in the last 12 months ? I also need to know the date or age of first diagnosis , and whether the sleep apnea was diagnosed as obstructive , central , mixed , or unknown . As well as was the sleep apnea diagnosed as mild , moderate , or severe and then the date of the last sleep study that you have undergone . All these factors will be able to give us a great idea of which carrier to go to . Remember certain carriers are more benevolent with sleep apnea when it comes to pricing life insurance .
For treatment of sleep apnea Medicare does require a CMN -LRB- certficate of medical need -RRB- form to be completed by your doctor . The patient must have seen a doctor prior to the sleep study test . The patient must have completed a Medicare approved sleep study test The patient must have had training fomr the CPAP provider on the use and care of the machine
Medicare will cover the cost of renting a CPAP machine if there is a medical necessity . You must have been examined by a doctor , the doctor must have prescribed a sleep study and the study must have been diagnosed with sleep apnea . Your doctor must submit a CMN to Medicare .
Can you get life insurance with sleep apnea ? Yes , it is possible to obtain life coverage while having sleep apnea , but chances are the class will be standard or lower . Sleep apnea is an unpredictable outcome illness as it can be the begining of other serious coniditions . Someone with sleep apnea must show good control , consistent use of their c-pap machine -LRB- currently 50 % of the people stop using their cpap after one year . -RRB- and not have issues elsewhere .
Sleep apnea can affect life insurance ratings on premiums . The severity of the sleep apnea can effect coverage from a standard issue to a decline for coverage . The underwriters are more concerned with the symptoms associated with the sleep apnea . If it is causing high blood pressure , insomnia , depression , etc. and not controlled most carriers would decline . If it is controlled surgically or with a Cpap machine the rating would be minimal .
People who have been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea can be eligible for three months of CPAP -LRB- Continuous Positive Airway Pressure -RRB- if that is determined medically necessary . If the CPAP therapy is helpful , Medicare may extend the length of time that the machine rental and purchase of related supplies -LRB- mask , tubing -RRB- is covered .
A Table B or Table 2 life insurance rating is generally equal to the standard rating plus an additional 50 % premium . As a rule of thumb , each table a carrier adds to a standard rating is a 25 % increase in premium over the premium for a standard risk class . Some life insurance companies use different rating systems than others , but this is generally the industry standard . Every life insurance company has different underwriting , so while you may have been offered a Table B rating by one company , you might be able to get a better rate , including standard or even preferred , with another company . If you have been assigned/offered a Table B risk classification on your life insurance application , it is likely due to the one of the following : 1 -RRB- Elevated weight to height profile 2 -RRB- Abnormal blood pressure readings 3 -RRB- Abnormal cholesterol readings 4 -RRB- Abnormal lab results , including A1C hemoglobin levels or elevated liver functions 5 -RRB- Abnormal EKG reading 6 -RRB- Diabetes 7 -RRB- History of cancer 8 -RRB- History of heart issues or heart disease 9 -RRB- Sleep apnea , including use of a CPAP or Bi-PAP machine 10 -RRB- Other disease or disorder 11 -RRB- A combination of the above conditions You may be thinking at this point that it would be a good idea to just apply for another policy with a different company and the results are better next time . DO NOT DO THIS !!! Every time you apply for coverage , the result of the underwriting gets entered in to the Medical Information Bureau database . When a carrier sees you have applied for coverage with multiple carriers and they each offer you a table rating , the less likely your odds are to get a better offer because it 's sort of like a red flag to other carriers . Before applying with any other insurance companies , you need to consult with a life insurance broker who has a strong background in high risk life insurance . A broker can shop your case informally to determine which carrier will work best for your specific medical history . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Depending upon if your sleep apnea is mild and controlled , not severe and uncontrolled , you should be able to secure life insurance coverage at standard offers or better . Some sleep apnea can be corrected with surgery and some life insurance companies are benevolent because it was corrected . The real problem is diagnosed uncontrolled sleep apnea with no Cpap machine , that can cause dramatically affect an underwriting offer or outright declination .
No , unfortunately , refraction is not covered by Medicare . Refraction , or the part of the eye exam in which you look at a chart of letters while looking into a machine called a phoroptor , is usually used to determine the need for eyeglasses . Medicare considers this a routine procedure and therefore does not cover it , even though at times refraction is used for medical purposes .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Whole Life Insurance Ever A Good Idea ?
First you need to understand that there are a number of variations on Permanent or Whole Life Insurance . Universal , Indexed Universal , Variable Universal , and straight Whole Life are all `` Permanent Life '' insurance . That said , I would answer your question by saying that Whole Life Insurance is Always a good idea ! From there it needs to be determined what you range of objectives are to determine which type will be best for you . As mentioned above Whole Life is Cash Value insurance that grows cash value tax free at a minimum guaranteed rate . The exceptions are the variable and universal varieties , which are subject to stock market variations and cost increases .
Is whole life ever a good idea ? Absolutely , for those who understand it 's application and use , it makes great sense . For those who always want to compare it to a stock mutual fund that never ever does anything but go up , well , it shows that they really do n't have a good understanding of how RISK applies to financial choices . I own whole life for many years now . It has served me well , done what I have expected it to do and even better it has never gone backwards like my qualified plan investments have or my real estate investments have . Whole life insurance is a solidly boring financial product that serves a good purpose in a portfolio . It is part of a portfolio , a boring part , but if you 've been around long enough and put money in different places , you 'll understand the need to have something like whole life . Some choices should n't keep you up at night .
Participating whole life insurance can be an excellent saving vehicle for long term conservative savers or as a conservative part of a persons retirement portfolio . And along those same lines of thinking , can be a disciplined monthly savings approach similar to dollar cost averaging .
Is whole life ever a good idea ? Absolutely , for those who understand it 's application and use , it makes great sense . For those who always want to compare it to a stock mutual fund that never ever does anything but go up , well , it shows that they really do n't have a good understanding of how RISK applies to financial choices . I own whole life for many years now . It has served me well , done what I have expected it to do and even better it has never gone backwards like my qualified plan investments have or my real estate investments have . Whole life insurance is a solidly boring financial product that serves a good purpose in a portfolio . It is part of a portfolio , a boring part , but if you 've been around long enough and put money in different places , you 'll understand the need to have something like whole life . Some choices should n't keep you up at night .
It is always a good idea to purchase cash value life insurance while you 're young and healthy . Think of it as buying a piece of undeveloped property . You can buy it cheaply and as you hold onto it the value increases over time . Whole life is a valuable asset that works best with a lot of time to work . What really is good about whole life is later in life , when you 're not so young and not so healthy . They ca n't take it back , end it or raise the price . Believe me , as a 53 year old with major health issues the most secure financial tool I own is my whole life insurance . My health as of late , would probably make me uninsurable , so having taken care of that as a younger much healthier man , was one of the smartest things I 've ever done . Also term insurance as you hit your 60 's is not the same product price wise as your 30 's was . It is very expensive and many people in thier 60 's are now looking for low cost term insurance for the next 30 years and are n't finding it . Later in life , term insurance has a way of making whole life purchased at a much younger age a real bargin .
It is a good idea to talk to your Insurance Professional in order to completely understand the terms and conditions of your policy . That having been said , in most standard renters insurance policies , vandalism is included among the covered perils for which you would have protection . Should you ever have to file a claim with your insurance company for this , it would be a good idea to first report the loss to the police and obtain an incident report as your Claims Professional will need to see this .
That is a good question ! Typically college students are under age 30 and therefore are in the best class as far as insurance premiums go . When a person is young and healthy is the very best time to implement a Whole Life , Cash Value insurance policy . So really the first thing a college student needs to know about life insurance is that while Term insurance is really cheap , it has no cash value to the policy holder ever , unless it has a accelerated benefit rider . In that case it will pay a percentage of the death benefit to the policy holder in the case of critical or chronic illness where the client can not perform at least 2 of the essential daily living tasks . Otherwise the only benefit to anyone other than the insurance provider is in the case where the death benefit is paid to the beneficiary . Also regarding Term insurance , as the name implies , it will end at the completion of the term , ie : 10 years ; 20 years ; 30 years . And then it will be much more expensive to buy another term . Whole Life is more costly in premium than Term , but still much less when you are young and healthy . There are a variety of kinds of Whole Life policies , but with `` Straight Whole Life '' premiums are guaranteed not to increase over the life of the policy , so in actuality it is more affordable than Term over the long haul . And the premiums you pay into Whole Life build cash value that you can use without ever paying taxes on ! Contact me for more information .
Is borrowing against a policy a good idea ? Yes , it can be , it can depend though . Keeping the policy in force is important as it creates some tax advantages on the funds borrowed as you are essentially taking a part of your death benefit early for use elsewhere . Where borrowing against your life insurance is a good idea is in what steps you have to take to do compared to other avenues . Have you ever sat in a bank office cubicle while someone else decides if your need is worthy enough ? How they have to decide if your need fits ? A great thing about borrowing against your value is you simply make a call and the money is wired to your bank account . You are not asked to explain your need , your need is not subjected to review by somebody else . Simply put , what you want to do with those funds is not subject to the approval of somebody else .
I love this question ! I have clients right now who pay more for collision coverage than they could ever collect on a total loss . It make no sense at all , it 's just what they 've always done . There 's a loose formula that I use in advising my clients about insuring an older vehicle . Look on KBB.com or Edmunds and get a rough idea of what your car is worth . Do n't use the `` clean retail '' . That 's completely unrealistic . Use the average trade or rough . It 'll be closer to the truth . Also check autotrader to get a range of what the cars are being listed for . Once you have a pretty good idea of what your car is worth , compare it to the cost of your physical damage coverage . If the cost of the coverage is more than 10 % of the value , you might consider dropping the coverage . That means that , in about 2-3 years , you 'd spend more than the value of the car . If you do have an accident , you get to make the decision on whether to repair the car or replace it . You 've already saved enough to do either -LRB- if you have n't spent your savings -RRB- . Bottom line , be aware of what your vehicles are worth and act accordingly . Spending money on coverage that would n't pay much does n't make a whole lot of sense . That 's not your agent 's place to decide for you , but we deal with it a lot and can make a suggestion . Find a good agent you can trust and go through the process . You 'll save money in the long run .
Your comment made me laugh ! And yes , I can answer your great question like a five year old , I 'm a master of simple ! An annuity is a way of putting money aside now to spend later . You get them through insurance companies . Once you put the money in it , you should n't touch it . It sits for many years growing and waiting for you . Once you get old and need it , you tell it you are ready to get paid . It will then start paying you every month until you a. -RRB- use it up b. -RRB- pass away or c. -RRB- your surviving spouse passes away -LRB- you pick one when you get it -RRB- . They are a way of making sure you have money during your retirement . They are not a good idea for everybody - -LRB- like riding a bike without training wheels for the first ever bike ride -RRB- some people have trouble with their bills , and setting aside lots of bill money could be a bad thing , so they have to do what is called a ` suitability study ' first . It will help figure out if it is a good thing . If the person you talk to does n't do one , they are bad - run away ! And some of them are filled with hiding fees and costs , that eat away like bad bugs at your money while it is away , so you have to be careful and ask ` pacifically what the costs are in total for the annuity . If it does n't cost too much , it is a good thing . There are lots of types , so ask about all of them and take notes before you even think of giving them your money , k ? I hope that helps , please realize that is greatly simplified . But the bottom line is that the right annuity can be a great part of your retirement plan . Please feel free to contact me for more details , or to answer any lingering questions , okay ? Thank you for the ` funnest ' question I have ever gotten to answer here !
Everything mentioned above is correct . You need to also consider when selecting Life Insurance for somebody that 's older the underwriting process you 'll have to go through . Depending on the benefit amount , some companies have a nonmedical underwriting process . That means mom and dad do n't have to give a blood or urine sample . You 'll see these type of plans on TV . Yet be aware of what you 're buying . Most of the TV Brands do not have guaranteed level premiums for life , or the death benefit is n't paid in full for the first two years . Allow me to explain in more detail . These plans are often called final expense Life Insurance . Generally speaking there or two ways the benefits are paid out . If your parents or in overall good health , without a major event like a heart attack or cancer in the last two years , they should be eligible for what 's called an immediate benefit . Once the policies approved the death benefit is available the next day . The other type is called a graded benefit -LRB- or call date modified benefit in some cases -RRB- . Again , generally speaking , most of these plans have a limited payout the first two years of policy is in force . Some pay a percentage of the death benefit while others refund all your premiums plus an interest rate . These plans are great if mom and dad are in poor health . Some applications have zero medical questions . I often see where someone is sold a graded benefit when they could have received a level benefit with a different carrier . Underwriting is the key factor ! If your parents are in good health they may want to consider a fully underwritten policy . That typically includes a small medical exam . Think of it this way , the deeper the carrier looks into somebody 's health , the better their rate for the same benefit will be . Then there 's the whole question of what type of insurance to get . Whole Life -LRB- which is what the Final expense plans are -RRB- , Term , or Universal Life . The Orman 's and Ramsey 's of the world will tell you to buy nothing else than term . . ever , ever , ever ... . I 'm not going to debate that now . Just going to say they are hurting a lot of people with such narrow , cookie cutter advice . ALL life insurance types have a time & place . If you have further questions ... Reach out . Honored to help ... - gravy .
What is a good rate for whole life insurance ? What ever you can qualify for is the correct answer . You are the discount . Your good health and good health history reduces the rate for whole life -LRB- actually all types of life insurance basically -RRB- and provides you the discounted cost you seek . So if you have taken good care of yourself , the best rates will be available to you .
Another part to this answer is that not all life insurance policies ever pay a death claim . Most life insurance is not designed to be in force when you die unless you die younger than average . Term Life Insurance only pays a death claim if you die while it is in force . That 's usually 20-years when you are in your 30 's and 40 's and often up into your low 60 's . But most people do n't die that young . Other insurance is tied to your employer and only covers you during your working years . Most people do n't die during your working years . So the insurance company gets to keep all those premiums . Whole-life insurance is priced much higher than the others because it will pay a death claim 100 % of the time unless you cancel the policy . All insurance is priced based on the likelyhood of it ever paying a death claim . That 's why a healthy 35 year old man can buy a million-dollar 20-year term policy cheaper than a 70-year old would pay for a $ 10,000 whole-life policy . One is very unlikely to ever cost the insurance company anything . The other will certainly be paying a death claim within the next couple decades if not sooner .
Is Whole life insurance worth buying ? Well the answer is going to vary by the individual as people see worth differently . To me a decades old owner of whole life , all I can do is tell you why I purchased whole life . I liked the idea of owning the policy with a set price that can not be changed . I liked the terms of ownership did n't or could n't be changed over time . I like the steady boring returns to cash values that these policies produced . While my real estate , stock market and other investments have gone up and down , in many cases very dramatically , my boring whole life has done what it said it would . My whole life has NEVER gone backwards in value , it grows in good markets and bad ones . Is whole life the only thing you should purchase , well no . A good portfolio is a diverse portfolio . Whole life should be a part of it , but not all of it . Owning a whole life allows you to take risks elsewhere as you have a safety net .
Dave Ramsey does n't believe that whole life insurance is ever necessary or a good idea . He believes that everyone should buy term , pay off all debts quickly , build up a huge net worth and become self insured so that you never need any life insurance . That is a great plan but it does n't pan out for a lot of people for the same reason that we are n't all in great shape and our perfect weight for our height . Everyone knows what to do to become rich but most just wo n't actually do it . Instead of buy term , invest the difference and become rich ... most people buy term , spend the difference , retire middle-classed or worse and have to buy more insurance later in life when it 's much more expensive .
Better depends on available funds . Something is better than nothing . If you can not presently afford whole life , then getting term insurance is the smart thing . Getting whole life and not being able to afford it , may result in not paying the premium and being left with NO insurance . A reputable insurance agent will only sell you what you need AND can afford . Whole life never changes its premium , unlike term which will escalate at the end of the stated number of years . Also whole life builds up cash value . That value can be borrowed against , and not repaid , kept tax free , although it will lower the death benefit if not repaid . Whole life can eventually pay its own premium , from the cash value being built up . But be sure you can afford whole life at the beginning . Do not ever leave yourself with no insurance . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Great question ! There are a couple of things to consider , when looking for a renters policy . The first is an idea of the coverage amount that you will need . It will help if youhave a list of your items , model numbers , serial numbers , and receipts , if possible . Many insurers will use a scale amount , and if you can show a greater value , thenyou want the coverage to reflect it . You may have some expensive tastes in electronics , lets say , that might otherwise be undervalued without proof of what they are worth . That leads us to the second point - ask for replacement value , vs. actual cost . The insurance company will pay a claim on the actual cost method by taking the value of your electronics , and subtracting an amount to cover them for the cost of depreciation and wear and tear on those items . Under replacement value , they will take the value as what it would really cost to replace that same , or similar , equipment . You can see that might be a big difference . It may cost you a couple of bucks more , but you will appreciate it if you ever need to file a claim . The third thing to consider is the coverage , and deductibles . You want to get the most coverage with the least out of pocket expense for you . Lastly , find a good local agent that will work with you , and that you will trust . I hope that gives you a better idea of what to look for.Thank you for asking !
Is life insurance a good investment ? Well , it depends on if it fits your risk profile . I consider whole life insurance to be a part of my investment plan as whole life insurance offers a safe rate of return , ca n't go backwards in a down market and protects my family if I die before retirement . My whole life actually protects in retirement as when I die . That said , you will find whole life is absolutely the most boring financial product ever . Simply it does what it says it 's going to do , with no surprises along the way . Other investments shoot up , shoot down , stay flat and even fail . All which makes for great conversations over a beer . Life insurance ? Well , very few people brag about steady .
I never call Whole Life an Investment , because it has an entirely different purpose , but it is a TOOL ! A financial tool that pays off in many ways . For a kid , it is probably the very best financial tool you can ever have . It guarantees that for the life of that child , they will always have life insurance , so long as premiums are paid . They do not have to worry about ever becoming uninsurable , such as with diabetes or obesity , or heart ailment , cancer , or any other reason on earth . They are insured ! Their premiums will NEVER ever go up . They are locked in for the entire life , no matter what happens . As a kid , their rates are extremely low , so low they can be incredible . Every parent or grandparent should get life insurance on their children or grand kids . Love to help . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Permanent life insurance is a good idea when the death benefit is to be used for funeral costs , when the insured is using life insurance to pass their estate to heirs , when leaving money to a charity , or other purposes which require that the life insurance is in effect at the time of the insured person 's death , even if at a very old age . Permanent life insurance must be used if the desire is for the policy to build up cash value , or if the policy owner wants to have a reduced paid up policy if they ever stop paying premiums .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Car Insurance Cover Dwi ?
If you mean does auto insurance pay for a claim when you had an accident and were charged with a DUI , the answer is yes . I have seen some companies however exclude paying a claim if the DUI was considered a felony . This is usually not the case and the claim is paid . I would say this is about the only silver lining of what comes to follow by a DUI .
If you have an accident related to a DWI your policy will provide coverage however most companies will cancelthe policy at renewal . There are companies who insure drivers with DWI 's but the premium is a lot higher . Some states also require an electronic filing to make sure you have insurance . For example , in Virginia , if a driver gets a DWI you have to file an FR44 and your liability coverage has to be at least $ 50,000 / $ 100,000 / $ 40,000 .
This question can not be answered by anyone execpt the insurance companies underwriters and their managers . Auto insurance is rated on numerous factors : what city the car is kept in , what safety features does the car have , what offenses are on your driving record , your age and etc. . This is just a few rating factors insurance companies consider . Then , to make this more complicated , each factor has its own weight within a given insurance company . For example , I live in Michigan and have a not at fault accident on my record . A regional insurance carrier counts that against me to increase my premium cost and price me out of its market . A national carrier , on the other hand , does not count the accident against me , whichmakes my premium muchlower . In summary , it really depends upon your insurance carrier . My best advice is to contact your agent and have him ask how this will effect the renewal rate -LRB- keep in mind your insurance carrier might issue a non-renewal because of your DWI -RRB- . If it will go up considerably you might want to consider shopping around .
Great Question . Car insurance will go up after a DUI it might be up to % 100 increase in insurance pemium . Some companies will also drop your insurance if you get a DUI or DWI it all depends on your insurance company . Good luck and stay safe while driving your car .
Yes . DUIs can greatly affect your the risk class you can qualify for in life inurance . A history of being charged with driving under the influence -LRB- DUI -RRB- or driving while intoxicated -LRB- DWI -RRB- one or more times can make it difficult to obtain the life insurance coverage you need at an affordable rate . The ratings that life insurance companies will assign for people with history of DUI vary substantially between companies and the difference could cost you thousands of dollars . Whether applying for a fully underwritten or non-medical life insurance policy , the carriers will want to know the input regarding a number of questions -LRB- typically you would fill out a DUI questionnaire form with the application -RRB- to make an accurate risk assessment : 1 -RRB- How many times have you been charged with DUI/DWI ? 2 -RRB- When was the most recent charge ? 3 -RRB- Are you currently on probation ? 4 -RRB- Has your license been revoked or suspended one or more times ? 5 -RRB- Have you been cited for any other traffic offenses ? 6 -RRB- Have you sought treatment for alcohol abuse at a rehab facility or attended meetings with support groups like Alcoholics Anonymous ? 7 -RRB- Are you still drinking , or have you quit completely ? The most likely offer you receive , depending on how long it 's been since the DUI , will either require a table rating and/or a flat extra rating . A table rating is an additional percentage charged on top of the standard premium . As an example , a Table D/Table 4 is generally about two times the standard premium . A flat extra rating is an additional cost per thousand dollars of coverage , such as $ 2.50 per thousand . Another example would be a $ 1,000,000 policy with a flat extra of $ 2.50 per thousand would require additional premium of $ 2,500 in addition of the standard rate , regardless of how many years the policy is guaranteed . If you have a history of DUI or DWI in your records , you should NOT apply with multiple companies at the same time . The more companies that give you a table rating , flat extra rating , or decline coverage on a formal application , the less likely you are to get a better offer . Your best option is to consult with an experienced life insurance broker before applying for any coverage . We can shop the case for you among multiple carriers to get an understanding of the risk class carriers will likely assign for your coverage - this will point you in the direction of who is the most appropriate carrier to apply for coverage with . The risk class is the most critical item for coverage because it determines the premiums . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Your car insurance will increase after a DWI . How much ? The increase in rates will vary , depending on the company you are insured with , other drivers on the policy , the vehicles on the policy and existing discounts you are receiving . A rough estimate could be an increase of approximately 20 % -50 % , but with many insureds , the increases could be larger or smaller .
Most standard Auto Insurance providers when filing their underwriting standards in each state will include a provision to consider most minor moving violations within 35 months to 3 years from the inception date of their policy . Major violations such as a DWI for example may be considered with 5 years .
It depends on the company and the type of violation . Most companies review your driving record for the past 3 years but some companies look back 5 years . If you 've had a major violation , such as a DWI or Reckless Driving that will show up for 5 years . I would highly recommend working with an independent agent who knows underwriting criteriaand who can shop your policy with several different companies .
An auto insurance provider can drop you for the obvious like non payment of premium after the end of a grace period . You can also be non renewed at the end of your current policy term because you have had too many accidents or moving violations and therefore fall outside of their filed underwriting guidelines . In cases like these , they are required to give you notice of 30 days . If you receive a DWI and your license is suspended and the company hears of this , you may be dropped mid term , but again , notice must be sent .
We represent carriers who look back 35 months , others 36 months , some out to 60 months , and a few out to 84 months . Some types of violations are of interest to carriers who may only ordinarily look back 35 or 36 months . Major cites like a DWI , reckless operation or similar violations will earn you a minimum five year experience period . Some states like Michigan use 2 years for a minor violation and 3 yrs on an accident to match the State 's driver point assessment schedule . Check with your state driving authority for law or permissible practice in your state .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Does Life Insurance Affect Taxes ?
If you receive a life insurance death benefit as the result of being a beneficiary on a policy , you will not have to pay income tax on it , in most circumstances . If the Insured person also owned the policy , and the death benefit brought the value of the estate over the limit exempt from estate taxes -LRB- $ 5,250,000 in 2013 -RRB- , estate taxes may need to be paid .
There are several federal tax benefits to owning life insurance . The most obvious is that the death benefit passes to the policy beneficiary income tax free . This doesnt just apply to individuals but can apply to a business , a trust , or an estate as well . When the insurance is owned by a third party or an irrevocable trust it will may also bypass estate taxes . When an owner needs to withdraw money from a policy by surrendering the policy the money that is withdrawn receives favorable tax treatment and only that portion that is in excess to the premiums paid becomes taxable . You can take out federal income tax-free loans from a permanent life insurance policy . The loans may reduce the death benefit and are limited by the cash value of the policy . When loans are taken the proceeds are not subject to the 3.8 % passive income tax rule of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- These loans will not affect income taxes on your social security benefits and they do not affect the FAFSA application for student funding . Increasingly policies have provisions that allow the owner to withdraw funds to pay for certain long term care expenses . This is usually free of federal income tax . Discuss this more closely with your insurance agent as different company designs will result in varying taxation . There are tax free transfers available to holders of permanent insurance policies that allow growth in excess of premiums paid to be transferred to other insurance and annuity contracts without incurring a current tax obligation . Of course , death eliminates all taxes on deferred growth .
Depression can affect life insurance rates very little , or it can affect them a lot . The severity of the depression , whether or not there were suicidal thoughts or attempt -LRB- s -RRB- , whether there was hospitalization for depression -LRB- and if so , how often and how long ago -RRB- , if the applicant is on disability for depression , how many medications are being used to treat the depression , and whether therapy is part of the treatment can all affect the rates . Mild depression treated with only one medication can result in preferred rates . A long history of depression that is resistant to treatment and has a high risk of suicide can result in a decline . In my experience , severe depression is far less common than mild depression , and most policies involving depression get rated favorably .
No , basal cell carcinoma does not have much of an effect on life insurance premiums , if any . Squamous cell carcinoma does affect rates more , depending on the stage , how long ago it was removed , and whether there was any recurrence or multiple spots . Melanoma , of course , has the most significant impact on life insurance rates of cancer affecting the skin , and may cause a decline if past stage 1 occurred within the past year .
Divorce does affect life insurance but maybe not in the way you are asking your question . It does not affect your premiums or cost but it will affect other aspects of your policy . The first thing that needs to be addressed is the beneficiary . You may not want your ex to receive your life insurance proceeds . Next aspect to be examined is your face amount . Now that you are on your own , do you have the proper amount of life insurance for children , loved ones to cover debt , etc. ? Last is the term or type of policy . Are the premiums guaranteed for the proper amount of time ? I recommend sooner rather than later sitting down with your agent to address these needs before it becomes too late .
If your question is what affects the stability of life insurance rates , the answer is , not very much . Life insurance rates are based on multiple millions of lives and death rates are predictable . A dramatic change in the financial markets could affect life insurance rates if the companies can not earn the necessary returns to maintain their promises . A dramatic epidemic could affect rates . Recently rates were affected by regulation . These changes are generally small .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
Term life insurance does n't affect financial aid . Life insurance owned by a trust and out of the estate does n't affect financial aid . However if the cash values of a personally owned life insurance policy are cited as an asset for personal bank loan purposes or business loans , it could be construed as a cash asset and may be characterized as an asset for financial aid means testing .
A DUI can affect life insurance rates , or even cause a decline . But if the DUI happened years ago , it may not affect your rate at all . The key factor with a DUI is how long ago it occurred ; whether there was more than one DUI ; and , if alcohol treatment was ordered , whether you continue to drink alcohol . One DUI over 5 years ago will affect rates far less than repeat DUI 's within a few years , especially if alcohol abuse/addiction is present .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
Diabetes does affect life insurance rates , but how much diabetes affects life insurance depends on the level of diabetic control . More than whether you are type 1 or type 2 , whether you use oral med or use insulin , whether you were diagnosed at age 10 or diagnosed at age 50 , your A1C number matters . If it is over 10 , the amount of life insurance you can get will be limited and the price will be very high . If under 8 , a person with diabetes can get affordable rates , even though higher than someone who has no health issues whatsoever .
Most renters policies will cover a lost or stolen Iphone . However , after factoring in the deductible for your renters insurance and how an additional claim may affect your insurance rates , it may not be worthwhile to make that claim . Speak with your agent or broker to find out how this claim will affect you .
Nowadays , car color does not have an affect on the cost of auto insurance . The things that will affect the amount you will spend are age of driver , residence location , driving history , insurance history , type of car , age of car , and cost of car . This is a very generalized list I gave you , and there are many other factors that go into the cost , but these are the most basic ones . I hope this helps you to better understand how the cost of auto insurance is formulated . Thanks for asking !
Getting married does not affect Medicare except in one way . The premium you pay for Part B may change , as that is based on your and your spouse 's income together . Getting married does NOT affect your plan , your deductibles , your co-pay 's , your premium for Part C and D , etc. .
Yes , in most cases . Rates for married vs single are different amoungst most companies . How it will affect your rates is unpredictible because it depends on whether or not you were residing in the same household over the last year for starters . In Wisconsin at least if you reside in the same household you must be listed on each others policies if separate insurance is carried . To know exactly how getting married would affect your rates , I would suggest contacting your local agent to discuss it with them .
In most cases , just having a pool does n't necessarily affect the pricing of a Homeowners ' policy , but it does affect underwriting requirements and should get you thinking about the best way to cover for that additional exposure . Here in Connecticut , building codes for each town regulate the security measures that are required for pools . In ground for example require fencing and self latching gates . Insurance rules will undoubtedly match that so if these are not in place , coverage wo n't be offered . As for the increased liability exposure , having a pool is one of many good reasons to talk to your Insurance Professional about Person Umbrella Liability policy for added protection .
This is what 's known as Universal Life insurance . These are permanent coverage programs that build cash value , much like Whole Life insurance does . The advantage of these programs is that you can pay more or pay less each month to keep the coverage going . However , when you do this , you can affect the guarantees -LRB- and even the non-guaranteed aspects -RRB- under the programs . There are two important factors to keep in mind when structuring a universal life policy , the guaranteed and non-guaranteed side . In short , the guaranteed side tells you how long your coverage is guaranteed for while the non-guaranteed side tells you how long it can continue on for , based on current assumptions -LRB- these figures can change and , therefore , the non-guaranteed length of coverage can change -RRB- . There 's also what 's called a Guaranteed Universal Life insurance policy -LRB- GUL -RRB- . These programs can create a level premium and death benefit guaranteed to a specific age -LRB- all the way up to age 121 with most carriers to guarantee the death benefit for life -RRB- . What this does is allows you to keep the premiums to its lowest levels and maximize the death benefit rather than placing the focus on the build-up of cash value , which is a common reason why many people buy whole life insurance . There are other moving parts in a universal life insurance policy , but this provides a brief overview .
Yes , scuba diving can affect life insurance rates . Recreational scuba diving less than 50 feet does not affect rates at all with many life insurance companies , so that if you are able to get the best rating based on your health , your diving will not bring that rating down . Some will allow the best or Preferred rating for divers who are experienced and do not exceed a depth of 75 ' . Being a certified diver and/or diving only in a club or with an instructor helps get the best rates . When dives are over 75 ' or the diver does cave diving , rescue diving or diving alone in remote areas , the scuba diving can bring rates down to Standard , add a flat extra , or even cause a decline . Agents familiar with this type of policy can get all the pertinent details from you and find out ahead of time which company has the best price for your particular type of scuba diving .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
No . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- aka ObamaCare -RRB- is on health insurance only . It wo n't affect life insurance , auto insurance , home owners insurance or anything other than health insurance . Long term if it causes a lot of frustrated people to jump off bridges or tall buildings it could eventually have an impact on life insurance rates . But so far that frustration has been mainly found in business owners and health insurance agents and has not affected the general public . We will have to see how things go in 2014 to see if it is truly an AFFORDABLE Care Act .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Bankers Life Insurance ?
Bankers Life is not an insurance policy it is the name of a company . There are actually several companies that include Bankers Life as part of their name . Bankers Life and Casualty is the largest . There is also Bankers Fidelity and others but when people say Bankers Life they are usually referring to Bankers Life and Casualty .
Bankers Life is not an insurance policy it is the name of a company . There are actually several companies that include Bankers Life as part of their name . Bankers Life and Casualty is the largest . There is also Bankers Fidelity and others but when people say Bankers Life they are usually referring to Bankers Life and Casualty .
A number of companies offer Cancer plans . To name a few , Standard Life and Accident , Bankers Fidelity , Bankers Life , Washington National , Sterling Life , and many more . If you are looking for a cancer plan call a good independent life insuance agent who can help you find a good plan that fits your needs and budget .
Bankers Life Medicare supplement plans are just like all the other plans from other carriers . When you compare identical Medigap plans , those with the same letter , the coverage is identical from carrier to carrier . The only difference is the price . An 82 year old female in Macon , GA would pay Bankers $ 246 a month for plan F but would pay $ 177 for the same plan with Equitable .
That is a great question ! There are a million people that will line up to help you put together a plan . Some will honestly want to help you , and some will look at you like a wolf looks at a fat , three-legged sheep . Please be careful , and go with someone that comes with high recommendations . Here 's what you can do to get started . Take a few minutes , and decide what retirement looks like to you . Are you fishing , travelling , working , not working , debt free ? Now take a look at your current financial status . What do you need to do between here , and retirement to make that happen ? I tell people that if you want to live at your current standard of living in retirement , then you will want to have squirreled away between 8-10 times what your current salary is . If you want to live better than you are now , then you 've really got to get started . Once you 've got an idea of what you need to save , then you can talk to your HR person at work about company match 401k , or other programs they might offer ; You can talk to your insurance agent or banker and get some ideas , or you can find an advisor that can help you take a look at how to make your vision of retirement a comfortable reality . I hope that gives you an idea , feel free to drop me a line if you need help , ok ? Thanks for asking !
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
That is a great question ! But I have to admit that I 'm a bit confused . If the spouse has no income , what is there that they can contribute ? There are also limits set upon the amount that can be contributed , based upon your income . You can not contribute more than your declared income , and if your spouse does n't have one ? You can contribute to theirs , however . Talk to your banker , or Roth administrator , and have them walk you through what you want to do , ok ? Thanks for asking !
Some companies that sell Long Term Care insurance in California are Genworth Financial , John Hancock , and Bankers Life and Casualty . Contact a Long Term Care or Life Insurance broker to find out what policies are available to you , and to shop them for you for your best LTC price .
Health insurance in the US began during the Civil War era with policies issued by the Massachusetts Health Insurance Company . The Blue Cross association was the first group to start what would evolve in to modern health insurance plans in this country . Other carriers , including Time Insurance -LRB- now known as Asssurant -RRB- have a long history of offering health insurance to individuals and employer groups . Over the last few years carriers such as Mutual of Omaha , Bankers Life and Casualty , Aetna , Cigna -LRB- formerly Connecticut General -RRB- and others have become prominent in the health insurance market . Kaiser Permanente introduce the HMO concept in 1933
Not everyone can get a life insurance policy on you , but a lot of people can . The list includes : your spouse , parent , child , brother , sister , grandparent , business partner , employer , and favorite charity . It could also include your banker , and investors in your company . Of course , you as the insured must agree to being covered . Also : former spouses and business partners can keep the policies they have on you !
A Money Market Fund can be a type of Mutual Fund . It refers to a fund that invests in short term debt securities such as treasury bills -LRB- T-bills -RRB- , commercial paper , certificates of deposit and bankers acceptance . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
I have given a lot of thought to this question . As you know , I sell life insurance professionally . It is a very competitive marketplace , and consumers have many options . You can go to independent brokers . You can go to captive agents . You can go to P&C brokers , group benefits consultants , financial planners . You can go to bankers , accountants , stockbrokers , and virtually every other financial professional who cross-sells . You can go on-line . You can go to some companies directly . I have staked my ground as a self-employed , independent , life insurance specialist . I think this model equips me to give not just good service , but outstanding service to my clients . I will tell you why . You can not be a jack of all trades and master of none . Life insurance is not an add - on commodity . It happens to be the most complex and extensively underwritten financial product in the marketplace . In some cases , you can go through more hoops buying life insurance than if you were buying a business . A life insurance broker needs to be a master of the underwriting process . He has to guide people through those hoops to get the most desirable results . Therefore he has to specialize in this product , and this product only . Financial representatives who have become expert in another niche simply can not master a second one . How many master builders out there are also master electricians and master plumbers ? The broker also has to be independent . Its not just a question of having access to multiple companies because different companies will be competitive for different insurance . Its also a question of having access to different distributors . Different general agents will have leverage with different underwriters in different companies . You cant just affiliate with one wholesaler and expect them to get the job done right for everyone of your clients . You need to spread your business around . Treating your sales practice like a business is also key . You are not just a salesman , and you are not just an expert . You are a businessman who can not survive without clients . You do not get paid until they are happy with the policy they bought . You need to have an attitude of keeping the customer satisfied . And that starts with making integrity the core of your business model . Every quote given should be both competitive and reliable . People should know what theyre getting before they sign on the dotted line . They should expect to get approved at the rate quoted . This is a normal expectation every consumer has . Whether you aree buying a toaster , a car , or an entire corporation , the product must be delivered at the agreed-upon price . This means that the life insurance salesman must make a commitment and an investment in every client taken on . He will have to negotiate and advocate on behalf of the client to make sure that all parties involved in the prequalification and underwriting processes perform with integrity . This way you as the consumer will be a happy camper when you do business with that broker . And that is the bottom line .
I am so glad you asked this question . Life insurance is an underwriting-driven sale . A well-managed underwriting process will yield both good pricing and good service . This is what you need to keep the client satisfied . The underwriter has the final word . At the same time , the client , the broker , the general agent , the case manager and the underwriter all collaborate in making things happen . In addition , third-parties such as physicians offices , and advisers such as accountants and attorneys and bankers , all have a role to play . Let me give you some examples of how things could work the right way , and also the wrong way . The right way can get you an approval in a matter of weeks . The wrong way can drag it out to months and months and months . First of all , you as the client must go through full disclosure . Answer every question thoroughly and accurately . Make sure you get prequalified so that any underwriting challenges are addressed before you submit a formal application . You might have to clarify elements of your medical history . You might have to give details on risky activities such as mountain climbing a scuba diving . Amendments to physician records may be needed . If all this information is collected up front , then you can benefit in two ways . First of all you can be confident that you have both competitive and reliable quotes . Your application should be approved at the rate quoted . In addition , the underwriting process should run more smoothly because a number of underwriting requirements have already been obtained . If you dont get prequalified , and underwriting challenges are not addressed before hand , then all the time needed to do so will delay the formal underwriting process . It is also important to get the insurance exam completed quickly . Those lab and test results are essential to evaluating the level of risk you present . It may be that your blood chemistry is off the day you take the exam , and that might raise some questions . You might even have to repeat the exam . Or clarification may be needed from your doctor . Better to take care of these items sooner rather than later . The longer you wait in scheduling that exam , the longer the evaluation will take , and the longer it will take to remedy any emerging issues . Medical records are also a dealmaker or a dealbreaker . They too play a huge role in assessing risk . These days many physician offices are short-staffed and overloaded with bureaucratic insurance company and government requirements . They often contract with services to make copies of records . Their turnover of requests for copies of files is often slow . Bear in mind that they are paid in advance and well paid for this service . You as the patient may have to get involved to stress the importance of a faster turnaround . Many times , statements and documents from professional advisors are needed . In one case I have , I obtained a medical approval of great pricing over six months ago . However , copies of trust and buy sell agreement documents are required to get the final approval , and to issue the policies . The attorneys and accountants still havent delivered . General agents play a key role in delivering customer satisfaction . Brokers typically do not deal directly with underwriters - we deal with general agents who operate at the wholesale level . A general agent who has strong leverage with carriers will be able to deliver underwriting concessions . He or she will also be able to intervene as needed and advocate on behalf of the client and broker if snags pop up during underwriting . Things can happen . Sometimes one underwriter will prequalify a case , and another will formally underwrite it . These two may not agree on what the price should be . The general agent needs to stay on top of this and get the dispute resolved as quickly as possible . Case managers are also key . These are personnel inside general agencies who expedite requirements . If they are really on the ball , then the broker is notified promptly of the need for outstanding records , documents , client information , etc. . If they are slack , then requirements are filled too slowly . I think too many agencies just rely on software to give updates . This technology is useful ; at the same time , managers really do need to stay involved personally with cases and move them along . It takes the personal touch . In essence , with the right team approach and cooperation from all involved , then things can happen relatively quickly . The broker needs to treat underwriting as such and provide proper direction . Without this leadership , there is so much room for error that underwriting can become a nightmare .
There are many great long-term care insurers , although the list is shrinking since specific carriers have exited the market . As of last year , some of the most respected insurers were AIG , Bankers , State Farm , New York Life , Berkshire and Northwestern . By contacting an experience broker who specialized in long-term care products , you 'll be able to easily understand the best options .
Yes as long as you can qualify medically with the company you would like to switch to . Do not cancel your Bankers policy until you are approved for the new one . Unlike Medicare Advantage , you can switch Medicare Supplements whenever you want . You can only change your prescription drug plan October 15th thru Dec 7th .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
If you were to cover every contingency of life with life insurance , you probably could not afford that much . Life insurance is a wonderful resource for the `` what if 's '' of life , but the `` what if 's '' can be endless . What if you died leaving your family without your income . What if before you died , you used up all your savings on doctor bills . Then , what if your spouse died shortly after you . What if the person you designated to care for your children , had just lost their job . What if ... . No one can have enough life insurance to cover every possible tragedy . But you can have enough life insurance to give your loved ones a chance . Providing them with enough income to give them time to adjust to life without you , without having to worry about getting a new job -LRB- or adding a second job to the one they already have -RRB- , is a good place to start . Giving them enough to live on until your children are grown , or for 10 years , is also a reasonable amount .
A nearly impossible question to answer . How much premium can you afford ? What carrier are you purchasing coverage with ? What is your health/medical history ? What is your family/medical history ? What is your occupation ? What is your geographic location ? What is you age ? What is you height/weight ? These are just some of the factors used to determine the amount of coverage and the premium that you would pay for that coverage ; that a carrier might use . Most carriers will handle coverage rates up to one million on a regular basis . Contact a local agent to find out what would be available to you .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can You Get Auto Insurance Without Owning A Car ?
Yes , you can purchase a non-owned auto coverage . This type of policy provides liability coverage for the insured for vehicles that they may drive but do n't own . Rates for this type of policy will more than likely be higher than if the insured did own a vehicle . Contact a local agent to find out more about the availability and costs of a policy of this type .
Yes . You are looking for a `` Named Non-Owners Policy . '' It provides coverage for liability for you as a driver . Perfect for a person who does n't own a car but will occasionally drivea family members car or who needs it for travel when renting a car . Fairly inexpensive too !
Yes , you can get a `` non-owners '' policy . This will cover your liability as a driver , if you do not own your own vehicle . This way you 're covered if you borrow someone 's car , or are renting a car . Contact a local insurance agent , and they 'll be able to get you the right policy .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
While of the `` unearned '' premium should be returned when you cancel your car insurance , it would be important to know why you are cancelling your car insurance.If there are no other cars in your household and you are not considered an insured on another comparable auto insurance policy , you may wish to consider `` Non-owned Auto '' coverage . This type of policy covers you for liability and physical damage while you are operating a car you do not own -LRB- borrowed , rented , etc. -RRB- and may provide uninsured/underinsured coverage to you when you are a pedestrian or riding in someone else 's vehicle . Not owning a car does not mean you no longer have an auto related exposure .
If you 're auto insurance is just too expensive for you to afford , there are some things you can do to help ease that burden . You may not like some of my advice , but it 's the right advice . A very large part of your insurance premium is the physical damage to the car itself . Raising deductibles will lower your premiums somewhat . Ask yourself if you really need to cover the physical damage at all . If it 's an older car and you own it outright , this could be an option . Before you do this , however , understand that , if your car is damaged , the insurance company will not pay to fix it . One thing not to do is to lower your bodily injury liability limits . You wo n't save very much and you 'll be putting everything you own at risk , including your income . Here 's the advice you may not like : Perhaps you have too nice a car for your budget . If that 's the case , get a less expensive car . Then , when your finances -LRB- or your driving record -RRB- allow , you can always get a nicer car . Talk to an agent you can trust . They can give you advice on these questions as well as others . It also helps if you check rates on a car before you buy it . Everyone loves getting a new car . You just do n't want an unpleasant surprise when your insurance bill comes .
I really do n't know the answer to this question , as I believe that every person who owns and drives a car needs auto insurance . Just think for a moment , if you did n't own auto insurance and you driving a car down a city street , when the car in front of you stops suddenly , you jerk your steering wheel to the side and manage to miss the car in front of you . You open your eyes and look at yourself and see that the airbags protected you and you were not injured ... but you find that you ran head long into the corner liquor store and end up in the middle of the scotch section , having destroyed most of the owners inventory . How would you pay for that ? Savings retirement , income will all be gone , as well as maybe your house and any other property you might own , not to mention your car is toast . This is the reason you need auto insurance , as it protects your finances now and in the future
Not sure where this question is going but I 'll do my best . Insurance without a license is a possibility but not a certainty . It depends on your state and the companies that are available there . Most states require certain mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . You can not get these coverages without a valid license . However , you may be able to get physical damage coverage for a car you own , even if you do n't have a license . If you ca n't find out from your state 's website , call a local agent and ask . Some companies will write a comprehensive only policy that does not provide mandatory coverages to legally drive a car . If this is available , be aware that they will not provide a certificate of insurance . It will cover damage to the car ONLY with a deductible applied . They will also , most likely , require photos to verify that there is no existing damage to the car . I do n't know if this answered your question or not . If the question is about getting liability coverage without a license , I can be pretty confident in saying no . Prab , i believe , brings up a different view of the question . I approached it from the view that you 're not eligible for a license because of past violations . If you are eligible for a license and just do n't have one , such as moving to the US and you just have n't gotten a US license , then he 's correct . We will write the insurance with the requirement that you get a valid Michigan license within 30 days .
This depends upon what you mean by `` Business Car Insurance . '' If you are asking about insuring an automobile with a business auto policy , those are typically more expensive than a personal auto policy . If you are asking about insuring a company car , then that should be handled by the business providing you the automobile . The company should look into endorsements covering other drivers , in case your family members living in the house use your company car . If you are asking how much it costs to insure a company car on your personal auto policy this is not really an option because you do not have a valid insurable interest in the car . What I mean by this is the company owns the car and is getting a benefit from letting you use it , so your only interest is not paying for a car , which is not an insurable interest on your part . I hope this helps !
You must have insurance when you rent a car . You have the option to either purchase the insurance offered by the rental car agency or if you personal policy extends you have the option to use your own personal auto insurance coverage . Always check with your agent to see if your own insurance will cover you in a rental car . The rental car agency is not going to let you rent their vehicle without insurance .
Insurance isnt a tax or merely a legal obligation . Because auto insurance follows a car you should have auto insurance any time you own a car . If you decide to register the car , most states will require insurance covering liability for the operation of the car . If you are going to store a car you should consider comprehensive auto insurance to protect your car from a wide range of perils .
Not quite sure what you mean . Do you mean needing auto insurance for some time until you buy a car , or needing auto insurance right before you buy a car and drive off the lot ? If you 're about to buy a car , all you need is the VIN # of the vehicle before binding a policy . If you mean needing insurance now without owning a car , you will need either a named operator policy or a broad form named driver policy , depending on the state you live in .
While it may be true your own liability , comprehensive and collision coverage may extend to cover you when renting a car , most of the rental agreements I have read make the renter responsible for expenses not covered by most auto insurance policies . In addition to the responsibility for the deductible , most rental companies make you reimburse them for the loss of value to their damaged car , the revenue they lose while the car is out of service and even the administrative costs they incur having the car repaired . These costs are not covered by most auto insurance policies . Remember you gave them your credit card and permission to put those charges right on your card . That might make your trip one you will remember ! And the damage to the rental car might not even be your fault ! Unless you have a good personal umbrella policy without a following form auto limitation and/or personal property care custody or control exclusion , I suggest you consider buying the damage waiver rental companies offer . The price is ridiculously high but it avoids an argument with a big company who would have your money and doesnt like to give it back . If more people would read the rental agreement and object to accepting responsibility for these costs , maybe the rental companies would remove these indemnity clauses for many of their good repeat rental customers . Until then it may be a matter of Pay me now or Pay me later .
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can A Minor Be A Life Insurance Beneficiary ?
Yes and they often are with young families . Many attorneys recommend declaring a financial steward or custodial trustee for the financial disbursements to minors . Sometimes a trust is the beneficiary on behalf of minor children . Interestingly , there is always a contingent beneficiary option in a life insurance application .
A minor can be a life insurance beneficiary , but it is generally in the child 's best interest to make the beneficiary of your life insurance policy be a trust , or trusted relative or friend who will use the money for the welfare of the child . That is because minors can not legally handle the proceeds and the court could appoint a guardian to do so for them .
Minors can certainly be named as a beneficiary to an insurance policy . But what you want to consider is what the purpose of the insurance is . If you want the insurance to cover your final and burial expenses then you may not want to name a minor because he or she will not have access to the money until age 18 or 21 depending on where you live . If the purpose is to leave a legacy for the minor , the best thing to do is create a living trust . Name the trust as the beneficiary and earmark those funds for the minor . A living trust is very flexible . You can basically say when and for what reason the minor can have access to the funds . You can say that money can be paid for the minors private education ; you can say the minor gets 25 % at age 21 , etc. . And the best part is whatever you have specified ca n't be changed after your passing AND the trust does not go through probate . So , there is no court intervention or delays .
Minors can be beneficiaries on a life insurance policy . Most of the time minor children are contingent beneficiaries as a backup to their parents if both were to die . But just because you can do it doesnt mean you should it . When minors receive death benefit proceeds after both parents have died custodial control and/or guardianship can arise . The creation of a trust could be a better alternative . Consult with an attorney before placing minor children as beneficiaries on your policy .
This is a very interesting question because life insurance carriers allow for a lot of flexibility in beneficiary designations . For example , you have the primary beneficiary . This person -LRB- or entity , such as a corporation or trust -RRB- will get the money when the insured dies . What if I unfortunately the primary beneficiary is not alive -LRB- or in business -RRB- when the insured dies ? That is why you can designate a contingent beneficiary . This beneficiary will get the money in those exact circumstances - when the primary beneficiary is not available . What if you wanted to name multiple primary or contingent beneficiaries ? That can be done . Do they have to get equal shares ? No . As a matter of fact , especially when the contingent beneficiary is children , parents often do not apportion the benefit equally . What if you want to set up successor beneficiaries along bloodlines ? Such as your child , but if your child is not available , then your childs child ? This can also be done . Make sure you discuss this with your estate planning attorney . What if you want to make the beneficiaries minors ? Not a good idea . An insurance company will not release money to a minor . You will need to do some estate planning to secure that money .
There are actually two common but different ways to assign life insurance . The first way to assign is with assigning the beneficiary for a temporary purpose . An example would be a financial institution loaning a substantial amount of money may require a person to assign them as beneficiary until the loan is repaid . Once this loan is repaid the assignment of beneficiary would go back to the original beneficiary , unless specifically changed again by the policy owner . The second common practice of assignment of life insurance is to assign a new owner of a policy . This is most common with cash value life insurance which a parent or grandparent purchased on a minor child . A minor can not own a policy with financial decisions , so an adult , usually parent or grandparent , will be owner until the child becomes an adult . The assign is made from the parent or previous owner to the insured child as the new owner .
Sure you can . All you need is a simple form . Ask your broker , orl call the carrier directly . Big question : what will you do if unfortunately this beneficiary is not alive when the benefit can be paid ? You need a contingent beneficiary as a backup . Give that some thought : who should be second in line to receive the money ? Another big question : is the beneficiary going to be a minor ? Did you know that an insurance company will not pay a benefit to a minor ? This means that you need to do some estate planning , in terms of having an executor and custodian appointed . An attorney who specializes in estate planning can help you .
A minor can be a life insurance beneficiary , but it is generally in the child 's best interest to make the beneficiary of your life insurance policy be a trust , or trusted relative or friend who will use the money for the welfare of the child . That is because minors can not legally handle the proceeds and the court could appoint a guardian to do so for them .
Yes , a life insurance beneficiary can be a minor . However , if naming a minor as beneficiary , the policy owner should consider naming a financial guardian for the child at the same time , as that will be required by the court if the insured person dies before the child reaches the age of adulthood . If a financial guardian is not designated to handle the life insurance proceeds for the child , the court will appoint one .
That is a great question ! It will depend upon the insurance companies rules . I have worked with some that will not allow a minor without guardianship or an established trust fund to be named as a beneficiary . Others are not so particular , but it may not be in your best interests to allow it . Often there are problems legally transferring funds to minors , and unless the guardian or trust is established , the money gets held up needlessly . Check with your State laws concerning minors , and then with your agent , and see if that can even be done . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Yes , a minor child can be named beneficiary of a life insurance policy and often are as a contingent beneficiary . It is a good idea to set up a trust to disperse funds to the minor child or name a guardian in your will to take care of the money on the child 's behalf .
Yes and they often are with young families . Many attorneys recommend declaring a financial steward or custodial trustee for the financial disbursements to minors . Sometimes a trust is the beneficiary on behalf of minor children . Interestingly , there is always a contingent beneficiary option in a life insurance application .
Yes a minor child can be a life insurance proceeds beneficiary . If you plan to make the minor child the primary beneficiary , you should take these steps as well . You should have a will in place to name a trust or legal guardian to hold and disperse the funds until the child turns 18 years old . Otherwise a probate judge will decide the child 's guardianship . That court appointed guardian will disperse the funds .
Yes , a minor can be a beneficiary of a life insurance policy . If a minor is named as beneficiary , be sure to appoint a financial guardian in your will to manage the money for your child until they reach the age of adulthood -LRB- either 18 or 21 , depending on where you live -RRB- . Otherwise , the court will appoint one for your child until they are of the age to manage their own money .
A qualified beneficiary must notify the plan administrator of a qualifying event within 60 days after divorce or legal separation or a child 's ceasing to be covered as a dependent under plan rules . Plan participants and beneficiaries generally must be sent an election notice not later than 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred . The individual then has 60 days to decide whether to elect COBRA continuation coverage . The person has 45 days after electing coverage to pay the initial premium . Qualified beneficiaries must be given an election period during which each qualified beneficiary may choose whether to elect COBRA coverage . Each qualified beneficiary may independently elect COBRA coverage . A covered employee or the covered employee 's spouse may elect COBRA coverage on behalf of all other qualified beneficiaries . A parent or legal guardian may elect on behalf of a minor child . Qualified beneficiaries must be given at least 60 days for the election . This period is measured from the later of the coverage loss date or the date the COBRA election notice is provided by the employer or plan administrator . The election notice must be provided in person or by first class mail within 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred .
Yes , a minor can be a beneficiary on life insurance . However , until they reach the age when they are legally considered old enough to manage their own money -LRB- which is either age 18 or age 20 , depending on the state in which you live -RRB- , someone else will need to be named to manage their money for them . 1 -RRB- This can be someone you specify in your will . Some people even name two guardians : one to take care of the money -LRB- guardian of the estate -RRB- and one to take care of the children -LRB- guardian of the person -RRB- . 2 -RRB- You can create a trust to be the beneficiary of the policy , with the trust spelling out how you want the money to be used on the minor 's behalf . 3 -RRB- If no guardian is specified or trust created , the court may have to appoint a guardian at the time after death when the policy proceeds are collected . You may want to visit with your lawyer and life insurance agent to be sure that you have your policy set up in the way that you want it to , if a tragedy should happen .
Yes , as Peggy mentioned you can name a minor as a beneficiary , however , you would be better served by at the very least leaving it in trust for a minor . Setting up a formal trust expressing your wishes would be preferred . In Canada , since you can direct that the proceeds be paid in the form of an annuity this should be explored . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
If a life insurance beneficiary is a minor , the court will appoint a guardian to handle the money for the child until they reach the age of 18 or 21 , depending on the state . If you want to select that person yourself , you can name a property guardian in your will , or name an adult custodian for the life insurance proceeds under the Uniform Transfers to Minor Act -LRB- UTMA -RRB- .
Yes , minors can be beneficiaries on life insurance . If the insured person passes away while the child is still a minor -LRB- under age 18 in some states , under age 21 in others -RRB- , the death benefit must be managed by an adult until the child reaches the age of adulthood . This helpful article describes some ways of legally handling this situation . WEBSITELINK
A life insurance trust is an irrevocable , non-amenable trust that is set up for the purpose of being owner and beneficiary of one or more life insurance policies . A life insurance trust generally exempts the life insurance policy from estate tax . The trust also can spell out how the Trustee should manage the death benefit so it best serves the needs of specified minors . Before deciding to set up a life insurance trust you should consult a reputable life insurance agent and lawyer . Some things to consider are that the Insured person can not be the Trustee , and only the Trustee can change the beneficiary . Also , the Insured person can not borrow from the life insurance policy .
end question
