start question
life-insurance
When Was Universal Life Insurance Created ?
Although there were similar products introduced in the 1970 's , most life insurance companies started carrying Universal Life as a part of their portfolio by the early to mid 1980 's . The high interest rates offered at that time made them very popular to consumers looking for a return on their life insurance premiums .
The company Trans America created universal life insurance . It is an indeed based , and flexible premium life insurance policy that is low cost and with increasing benefits . Tbis was during the 1980 's when this product was introduced . It is a fine product and has amazing benefits to the policy . Very low priced and with all riders .
Every insurance plan available in the market serves a purpose so you ca n't really say one is `` bad , '' each type of plan just has to be used in the right way . Certain programs are designed to meet certain needs . You 're not going to find one plan that meets every possible need you can think of . Universal life and whole life are two types of permanent life insurance - universal life has a lot of advantages to it that you wont find in whole life . One of the major parts of permanent programs to remember is cash value . However , many individuals do not realize that when the insured dies , the carrier takes back the cash value and pays out the death benefit . Whole life is generally going to be much more expensive than Universal life because of the guarantees inside the policy . Whole life can be a great tool for retirement planning , providing coverage for new borns , and other financial planning when you 're buying in your younger years , but can be very expensive in your older years . Universal life does not provide the same levels of guarantees inside the policy with regards to the cash value . The trade-off is the ability to secure lower premiums for the same amount of coverage and create flexible premiums . Whole life has been around for decades and decades . When universal life was first introduced into the marketplace -LRB- I believe around the 1970s -RRB- , if the cash value dropped to $ 0 , your policy would crash and not provide you with coverage unless you paid more into it . Around the late 90s/early 2000s , carriers started introducing what 's called a `` no-lapse UL rider . '' In short , these riders said that if the cash value goes to $ 0 , but you keep paying your premiums , the policy will still provide the death benefit coverage . The majority of universal life policies today will have this rider , now commonly known as Guaranteed Universal Life -LRB- GUL -RRB- , and can be structured to keep the premiums and death benefits fixed and guaranteed for life or up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 95 , to age 100 , etc. -RRB- . The idea being to maximize your death benefit without overpaying premiums . Contact an independent insurance agent/broker to learn more about these two products and which will be more suitable to your needs . If you 're buying strictly for the death benefit , you will likely want to look into a GUL policy .
The marital deduction act was the basis for creating joint life insurance or survivorship insurance . The marital deduction act allowed married couples to pass assets between them at the death of the first spouse . Survivorship was created to pay the federal estate tax at the second death of a married couple , coinciding with the marital deduction act . Survivorship policies have several actuarial formats like participating whole life , variable universal life , indexed universal life , current assumptions universal life .
Universal Life Insurance , is first and foremost a life insurance policy . If you require life insurance to provide cash at death to protect your loved ones , your business or your estate then an opportunity is created for you to utilize the reserve or cash value and use universal life as an `` investment '' . In Canada , there are limits to the amounts you can fund a universal life policy to keep the `` tax advantaged '' status of being exempt from accrual taxation . For individuals and corporations in the top tax brackets this tax advantaged status alone might make Universal Life a `` good investment '' , but for most there needs to be an life insurance requirement . In Canada , all earnings inside a Universal Life policy are expressed as interest , however , they can mirror the earnings of many of the top mutual funds . One company offers 400 + investment options in a `` tax advantaged '' plan . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Life insurance addresses three major planning goals : Indemnification , Income and Inheritance . Indemnification is insuring the lives of family members or business associates for the economic benefit of their beneficiaries . To indemnify the economic liability of short term financial exposure , you may want to consider term life insurance with a conversion policy provision to permanent life insurance . If the financial liability is perpetual , a permanent life insurance policy is recommended . Guaranteed universal life is the most economical of permanent policies . Income from life insurance policies can generate tax advantaged distributions for supplemental retirement planning . There are four life insurance policies to consider based on your risk tolerance . Participating whole life and current assumption universal life use interest rate crediting methods . Indexed universal life can use domestic and foreign indices . Variable universal life use separate subaccounts allocated to equities and bonds . Inheritance planning with life insurance can address estate transfer taxation , charitable giving and creating an estate for children and grandchildren . Married couples should consider guaranteed survivorship where two lives are used in one policy which can result real savings instead of two separate policies .
It depends on the financial planning goal . Life insurance addresses three major planning goals : Indemnification , Income and Inheritance . Indemnification is insuring the lives of family members or business associates for the economic benefit of their beneficiaries . To indemnify the economic liability of short term financial exposure , you may want to consider term life insurance with a conversion policy provision to permanent life insurance . If the financial liability is perpetual , a permanent life insurance policy is recommended . Guaranteed universal life is the most economical of permanent policies . Income from life insurance policies can generate tax advantaged distributions for supplemental retirement planning . There are four life insurance policies to consider based on your risk tolerance . Participating whole life and current assumption universal life use interest rate crediting methods . Indexed universal life can use domestic and foreign indices . Variable universal life use separate subaccounts allocated to equities and bonds . Inheritance planning with life insurance can address estate transfer taxation , charitable giving and creating an estate for children and grandchildren . Married couples should consider guaranteed survivorship where two lives are used in one policy which can result real savings instead of two separate policies .
Universal Life Insurance with a no lapse guarantee has some of the lowest premiums in permanent coverage . That is partly because you can buy UL that has almost no cash value . Therefore , most of your premium is going to purchase death protection . On the other hand , Universal Life Insurance can be used to create a lot of cash value , so that it can be used for expenses or retirement income . This is especially true with Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life . Obviously , this premium will be much higher . Your age , health , and policy features all also come into play in calculating the cost of Universal Life Insurance . This is definitely one of those products you do n't want to purchase without some professional guidance . It is impossible to even compare two UL policies unless you understand what you are comparing .
This is what 's known as Universal Life insurance . These are permanent coverage programs that build cash value , much like Whole Life insurance does . The advantage of these programs is that you can pay more or pay less each month to keep the coverage going . However , when you do this , you can affect the guarantees -LRB- and even the non-guaranteed aspects -RRB- under the programs . There are two important factors to keep in mind when structuring a universal life policy , the guaranteed and non-guaranteed side . In short , the guaranteed side tells you how long your coverage is guaranteed for while the non-guaranteed side tells you how long it can continue on for , based on current assumptions -LRB- these figures can change and , therefore , the non-guaranteed length of coverage can change -RRB- . There 's also what 's called a Guaranteed Universal Life insurance policy -LRB- GUL -RRB- . These programs can create a level premium and death benefit guaranteed to a specific age -LRB- all the way up to age 121 with most carriers to guarantee the death benefit for life -RRB- . What this does is allows you to keep the premiums to its lowest levels and maximize the death benefit rather than placing the focus on the build-up of cash value , which is a common reason why many people buy whole life insurance . There are other moving parts in a universal life insurance policy , but this provides a brief overview .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There is a diversity of life insurance products to fit multiple planning applications like indemnification , income and inheritance scenarios . Term and guaranteed universal insurance are generally indemnification and inheritance products to protect the policy beneficiaries from financial liabilities or benevolent giving of the policy insured . Participating whole life and current assumption universal life are conservative interest rate crediting policies for income scenarios . Other polices for income scenarios are Indexed universal life crediting earnings from indices , both domestic and foreign as well as variable universal life insurance which can credit from the guaranteed interest account or the separate sub accounts utilizing market equities and bond instruments . Product suitability , from a policy holder point of view , is determined by creating a financial profile that includes establishing product risk tolerance , economic goals and a reasonable timeline of life events based on life expectancy .
It depends on the need -LRB- not a very direct answer I know ! -RRB- - the reason for this is because everyone has a different purpose for why they 're buying life insurance . There 's no one shoe fits all policy in this industry . What you need to look at first is what you need the coverage for - it 's helpful to discuss this with an independent agent who can walk you through this and help you determine the structure that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you 're only interested in buying coverage to cover a certain debt for a limited time , you may want to look at term insurance - in that type of situation , you may just be throwing excess money away . If you 're buying coverage for estate planning purposes , you would want to look at permanent coverage because you 're planning for the long run and it 's not something you want to be cheap about . With permanent insurance , there 's two main types - Whole Life and Universal Life -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Under a guaranteed universal life -LRB- GUL -RRB- program , the policy can be structured to keep premiums level and provide coverage up to a specified age -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , to age 100 , or even up to age 121 -RRB- under the `` dial down '' process . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate -LRB- participating WL policies may pay dividends that can be used to increase the death benefit or decrease the premiums over time - non-participating WL policies do not feature this ability -RRB- - the trade off between this and guaranteed universal life is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of GUL programs on many occassions -RRB- . Regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , GUL policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . Some agents/brokers/advisors will ALWAYS suggest you buy whole life - others will NEVER suggest buying it . While it 's helpful to shop around , getting too many hands in the cookie jar can create a very confusing situation for the client.Each type of coverage has a benefit for certain situations . You need to trust the agent you 're working with to compare your needs , premium budget , the benefit level , how long you need it for , and other factors , to help you figure out what 's best for you whether that be whole life or another type of coverage .
The same companies that carry Term Life Insurance often carry Universal Life Insurance , and most agencies that sell Term also sell UL . When purchasing online , you will want to work with a licensed agent who has some experience , so they will understand the in 's and out 's of Universal Life . There are several types of Universal Life Insurance . Guaranteed UL allows you to lock in a level premium that will guarantee the policy to pay the death benefit to a certain age . This guarantee might be 20 years from now ; it might be to age 121 , or something different . It is important to select a guarantee to avoid the problems Universal Life presented in the past , when people bought while interest rates were high , and their policies started lapsing much earlier than anticipated when interest rates dropped . There are also many Universal Life policies that do not have `` no lapse '' guarantees . How long your coverage last relies on what the interest rate and cost of insurance are at any given time . Variable Universal Life allows you to invest in the stock market , with the potential for more growth -LRB- and more loss -RRB- than other UL policies . Indexed Universal Life allows you to take advantage of some modest gains by allocating premium to equity index accounts . While it does not have as much cash growth potential as VUL , it has much more protection from losses . Added to these are Survivor Universal Life policies off all types . These cover two people , and pay when the second person dies . Again , you 'll want to use an experienced agent when you buy UL . There are many knowledgeable agents on this website who can help you .
Whole life insurance has many advantages to it . The first being that your premiums are fixed and guaranteed for the rest of your life and as a permanent insurance program , it builds cash value over time . If it 's a participating whole life policy , any dividends that are paid out can be used to either increase the death benefit via paid up additions , reduce your premium , or make a payment to you directly -LRB- options depend on which carriers whole life policy you have -RRB- . If you use the dividends to reduce the premium , the policy can become self-sustaining after a number of years - meaning no more premium payments . Non-participating policies only build cash value - these types of plans do not pay out dividends . If you 're buying whole life coverage when you 're young and its cash value builds for years and years , it can create a nice nest egg for funds that can be used during your retirement years . It 's important to remember that if you borrow from an insurance policy , you 're creating a loan as the monies are expected to be paid back . If you cash out the policy , you lose the life insurance coverage . An alternative for those who are not very concerned about the cash value and want to maximize the death benefit of your life insurance , you may want to consider a guaranteed universal life policy instead of whole life . GULs can offer a larger amount of coverage than whole life policies for the same premium or save you a ton of money on your premiums for a given level of coverage . Make sure to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can create a structure that will best serve your needs , goals , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Universal Life insurance works well for people who want lifelong coverage at the lowest possible price . GUL -LRB- Guaranteed Universal Life -RRB- can be guaranteed not to lapse to age 120 + at a level premium . Because GUL has very low cash value , the premium can be kept relatively low for permanent coverage . Indexed Universal Life is a good product for those who want a safe way to save up money for retirement income . Unlike GUL , IUL is used to create large amounts of cash value that can be borrowed tax deferred during retirement . So Universal Life really can work for almost anyone . It is flexible and can be adapted for a lifetime .
what I think you mean by Legal cover is what we in the industry refered to as liability coverage . The reason it exists on a homeowners policy , is that it is protection most folks who own a home are at risk of needing . One develops an exposure typically by some form of negligence . So we in the US are empowered or constrained some by what we do that either creates a negligent action or by omission by creating a situation that by no action creates negligence.For example let me talk a bit about trees . Typically you can run the risk of causing harm to your neighbors if a tree on your property comes down on their house . In some states that would be viewed a negligent act in itself , but in other states you would have been required to have been warned by your neighbor of the potential danger in advance of the tree falling.Other mitigating factors will increase you propensity for being liable , such as the tree is dead . Those are some small ways we cause liability by some form of negligence.it may be easier to see negligence in driving but be assured there are many instances around a dwelling that can precipitate a legal liability for your self . Let me just give you a few to think about : your dog bites someone , a child secures a firearm and unintentionally shoots someone ; a visitor trips on the stairs you neglected to rid of ice , your son or daughter hits a baseball through a neighbors picture window , the child down the road jumps on your trampoline while you are not home , kids play in your pool without adequate supervision , your riding lawn runs over your neighbors foot . an on and on Keep a couple things in mind . Homeowners have coverage for various Perils -LRB- wind , hail snow etc -RRB- they all create hazards by the way the home is maintained , protected and secured . If you have a pool that is a creates a hazard of drowning . Without the pool there is little chance of drowning , so the hazards you create are ones for which there are often means to contain and yet the hazard still exist . You might have met the legal requirement to contain the space your pool occupies with a fence , but then negligently fail to lock the gate . so by your action or inaction you create scenarios for which you would be considered negligent and liable . The measure you should always use is what would a prudent responsible person do . If you follow that advise you may spend a few extra dollars , but you will avoid many unnecessary injuries and liabilities .
What is the best type of life insurance to purchase ? The answer depends on what you want the insurance for and for how long the coverage is needed . Life insurance basically creates cash at death which can be used to create or conserve wealth . There are additional features available depending on the type of plan and how you are planning to use it in your overall financial planning . Here are the main types of life insurance and some factors to consider : Term life insurance As the name implies , coverage is for a specified term : 5 , 10 , 20 , 30 years , etcetera . At the end of the term the term the policy renews at a higher premium . Factors to consider include : how long you need the coverage for , the rate at renewal and if you will need to convert to permanent insurance . Whole life insurance With whole your coverage is for your whole life . The factors to consider include whether the policy is participating and is eligible for dividends or non-participating . In addition the policy guarantees such as premium and cash value . The company financials and dividend history are important considerations especially when considering a participating whole life policy . Universal life insurance Coverage for your whole life if properly managed . This type of coverage offers more flexibility in premium level , insurance cost and investment options . These are all factors to consider . Working with an independent insurance broker , who understands your needs , will help you decide on the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can You Remove Spouse From Health Insurance ?
Yes , you can absolutely remove your spouse from your plan . If the spouse happens to be the primary on the plan , there should n't be an issue moving you into that primary spot . If the spouse is not primary , then I could n't imagine any reason at all that there would be an issue .
If you are covered under an individual policy you should be able to drop them from the coverage at any time during the year . The termination would generally be for the first of the coming month as your insurance carrier may decline to do a retroactive termination of coverage due to the possibility of recent unreported claims . You should note though that in today 's environment dropping your spouse from your individual coverage could leave your spouse uninsured until the next open enrollment period , which this year begins on November 15th for an earliest effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 . If your spouse is becoming eligible for Medicare then you will want to time the termination of the spouse 's coverage to match with the effective date of their coverage under Medicare . If you are covered under a group health insurance plan and you a having your portion of your health insurance premiums taken out of your paycheck on a pre-tax basis then your employer has a Section 125 plan in place and this restricts changes an employee can make to their enrollment status outside of the group 's open enrollment period . A change of life status event as defined under IRS regulations would have to occur for you to remove your spouse from coverage outside of the open enrollment period .
The death of a spouse is perhaps the most emotionally traumatic event which humans experience . What would you do if your spouse died unexpectedly ? In over 55 % of married-couple families today , both marriage partners work outside the home at least part time . -LRB- 1 -RRB- Often the financial requirements to run the household substantially exceed the income of either spouse alone . If an untimely death were to occur , the inability to meet financial obligations with the single remaining spouses income might require the hasty sale of assets or , even worse , a bank foreclosure on the family residence . Life insurance is an excellent means of providing money when it is needed in these traumatic moments . Some families are fortunate enough to allow either the mother or father to stay home with small children while the other earns sufficient cash to meet household and living expenses . It is obvious that the loss of a breadwinner would create a financial calamity . Couples should consider the potential cost of replacing the services of the spouse who stays at home to care for the children . Without the deceased spouse , a surviving spouse working outside the home would face new expenditures for child care , either in the home or at a babysitter or day care center as well as someone to take the children to the doctor , dentist , piano lessons , etc. . Perhaps the surviving parent could take time off work to fulfill these obligations , but this time off work would also amount to a financial loss . Most families can help effectively remove this potential financial emergency by acquiring a life insurance policy on each spouse . Source : Statistical Abstract of the United States : 2012 , Table 700 Married-Couple Families ; data from 2009 . Steve Savant is a contributor to Back Room Technician , an Advisys Company
Yes , absent some court order , there is no mandatory requirement that a husband or wife provide health insurance for their spouse or children . When one spouse could drop their spouse from their health insurance will depend upon whether they are covered under an individual health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy and , in the case of coverage under a group policy , whether the employer uses a Section 125 plan providing for employees to pay their share of health insurance premiums on a pre-tax basis . In the group policy setting when employees are paying their premiums on a pre-tax basis then changes to coverage are limited to the annual open enrollment period or change of life status events -LRB- e.g. - marriage , divorce , child birth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- . So , you and your spouse ca n't have a fight over the weekend and the your spouse walks into work on Monday and drops you from their group health insurance just out of spite . With individual health policies it is easier to change the coverage level at any month of the policy period . Now , thanks to ObamaCare , which somehow managed to not define a spouse as a dependent for health insurance purposes -LRB- remember `` We 've got to pass the law to find out what 's in it '' from Nancy Pelosi ? -RRB- . This has changed the potential status of spouses being defined as eligible dependents under the personnel policies of some employer 's group health plans . While relatively few employers have dropped coverage for spouses entirely , many employers are beginning to adopt personnel policies that require that employee 's spouses who are employed and have health insurance coverage available through their employer to enroll in their employer 's health plan or some are assessing a penalty or extra charge to spouses who do n't enroll in outside coverage through their employer 's plans . This may create a situation where a person may misunderstand that they are being forced off their spouse 's health plan due to a decision by the spouse 's employer and not the employee themselves .
Yes , you can absolutely remove your spouse from your plan . If the spouse happens to be the primary on the plan , there should n't be an issue moving you into that primary spot . If the spouse is not primary , then I could n't imagine any reason at all that there would be an issue .
This is really more of a legal question than an insurance question but I 'll give you some guidelines . As a general rule , if it 's on your property , it 's your responsibility . So , legally , if it 's your neighbor 's tree falls on your property , he should take care of it . This does n't always happen , and many small battles have ensued over just this type of thing . I 've seen neighbors do some pretty weird things in these situations . I 've seen people send registered letters , call the police , report to the city or township , even hire a lawyer to sue . My advice , be reasonable and talk to your neighbor , preferably before it falls , and come to some aggreement about what needs to be done , if anything . From an insurance standpoint , nothing 's really going to be done with a fallen tree unless it falls on something an causes damage . Then , in most cases , your insurance company will pay to move it off of your home , that 's it . Some homeowners policies will have endorsements available for debris removal which may pay to remove it , usually up to some limit . Many times , though , removing it from a structure is all an insurance company will do and removing the tree from your property is your responsibility .
That is a great question ! A lot of the answer can be found in a section of your policy called the `` statement of benefits '' . That is where your policy will spell out the specifics of who , if anyone can drive the car , and for how long . Generally if it is a spouse , and both are named on the policy , then the deceased spouse is removed , and the policy carries on with the surviving spouse . If there is an executor of the estate , and the deceased was the one insured , the policymay allow the executor limited use of the vehicle for a short time until the estate is settled . If there is no executor , and no one else was named as permitted to drive the vehicle , it ends with the deceased . Thanks for asking !
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
More often than not , surgical removal of a lipoma is not covered by health insurance . A lipoma is a benign soft tissue tumor that reside below the skin . They are usually soft to the touch and not painful . More often than not removal is done for cosmetic reasons . Health insurance policies cover treatment that is medically necessary . If the tumor is large and creating other medical issues -LRB- such as pressure on a nerve -RRB- or if tests reveal the tumor is liposarcoma your health insurance may cover removal .
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
You can have Medicare Part B removed by going to your local Social Security office or by calling 1-800-Medicare . I would not remove Part B unless you are covered by an employer group health plan if you employer has at least 20 or more full time employees . If you have gone back to work full time and being offered health insurance through your employer it may be appropriate to remove Part B of Medicare .
If the mole is non-cancerous , most health insurance policies will not cover removal . Health insurance plans cover most `` medically necessary '' conditions and SOME cosmetic procedures . Removal of a mole strictly for cosmetic reasons will most likely result in a claim that is denied . Examples of cosmetic procedures that may be covered include reconstructive surgery to repair damage caused by injury . Breast reconstructive surgery following removal of a cancerous growth is another example .
Health insurance may cover keloid removal if connected in some way with another covered event . For example , if you required surgery to address a serious health issue and the keloids formed from the surgical scar , your policy will probably cover the removal . Likewise if the scarring resulted from an accident where you sought treatment within a prescribed time frame , then the procedure may be covered . Most plans will not pay benefits for any purely cosmetic procedure .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
There are numerous factors involved in the rising cost of health insurance and one could write a book about them . Some of the most important factors are ; 1 -RRB- Health care costs continue to rise . Whether it is hospital services , physician care , prescription drugs or virtually any health care service you can name , their costs continue to rise from one year to the next . Health insurance rates are merely a reflection of the underlying costs of the health care services their policies cover . 2 -RRB- Obamacare Taxes and Fees - buried in your health insurance premiums are taxes and fees that were created by the `` Affordable Care Act '' . Some are direct such as a reinsurance fee that was over $ 5 per covered person per month in 2014 and is to be used to offset losses that insurance companies may incur from enrolling too many unhealthy members now that ObamaCare has prohibited underwriting for risk and pre-existing conditions exclusions , to the medical device tax that adds to the cost of a wide variety of medical devices such as artificial hip joints . These increased costs are , of course , passed on to the consumer . 3 -RRB- Changes to how health insurance policies can be rated and issued - ObamaCare requires that health insurance policies be `` guaranteed issue '' -LRB- a person ca n't be declined for coverage -RRB- and that no pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations or waiting periods are allowed . This literally means that a person can be terminally ill or about to give birth and if they enroll during the annual open enrollment period or a special election period they are guaranteed to get coverage . Obviously , taking on a claim that can range from thousands of dollars to a million or more when the insurance company in turn may receive only a tiny fraction of that amount in premium payments from the sick or injured person creates a shortfall that has to be made up through higher premiums for other insured persons . 4 -RRB- Increasing consumption of health care services . As the American population ages -LRB- with the Baby Boom generation moving into its retirement years -RRB- they naturally consume more health care services of all types . With the barriers to access to health insurance being removed and Medicaid eligibility expansion this also increases the consumption of health care services . A basic law of economics is that increased demand for something with a limited supply -LRB- there are only so many doctors , hospitals , etc. -RRB- will lead to higher prices . While this is not a comprehensive list of the factors driving health insurance costs higher , these are some of the key ingredients .
Some companies will allow you to change your policy mid-contract . If your health insurance coverage is thru your employer , you will need to check with the Human Resources Manager , or the person in charge of employee benefits . Depending on circumstances , you may have a Qualifying Life Event , such as the birth of a child , or a spouse losing current coverage due to job loss . Most companies have a Annual Open Enrollment when coverage can be changed regardless of the circumstances . If you do not have your coverage thru your employer , or your spouses employer , you may still be able to change coverage mid-contract . Most companies will allow an insured to add a child due to birth or adoption , and in some cases , coverage may be automatic for a short period of time . Some companies may only allow the changes to go into effect at the monthly renewal . So in other words , if a policy was written on June 3 , and a request for a change is made on July 20th , you may have to wait until August 3rd for the change to apply to your policy . Read your policy or contact your insurance company to see if coverage can be added or removed , deductibles raised or lowered .
Getting married may or may not have an effect on your insurance policy depending upon what actions you take . Technically adding your new spouse to your policy will not change your benefits but it may have an impact on your monthly costs . If you are covered under an individual major medical policy then you would see your monthly premium increased by the amount associated with your spouse 's age for the policy you have in force -LRB- this assumes you are covered under an Affordable Care Act compliant policy taken out on or after January 1 , 2014 when community rating went into effect -RRB- . If you are adding a spouse to an employer based policy then the financial impact will depend upon what your employer 's contribution is towards employees with dependents . Some employers contribute towards the health insurance premium costs of their employees and their covered dependents . Increasingly though , employers are contributing only towards the cost of the employee 's coverage and the employee is totally financially responsible for the difference in cost for adding a dependent to their coverage . To make things even more interesting , the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- does not define spouses as dependents ! So , while the practice has not become wide spread yet , some employers are not allowing spousal coverage under their group plans -LRB- dependent children must be covered according to the ACA -RRB- . What is more common is that if your spouse is employed and their employer offers health insurance and yet you still wanted to add your spouse to your coverage , the employer could assess a penalty charge above and beyond the additional premium cost for adding a spouse in this situation . Obviously the objective here is to discourage the addition of spouses whose cost and risk could be borne by another employer . So , adding a new spouse to your health insurance coverage may not be the simple transaction that it may have been in the past . You need to explore your options and determine what the financial implications are for adding a spouse to your coverage . In some situations you may find that it makes more sense financially to purchase individual health insurance coverage for your spouse than to add them onto your group 's health insurance plan . I would recommend you find a health insurance broker to assist you with this decision making process .
It will depend upon your medical situation ; 1 -RRB- No Scenario -LRB- the most likely -RRB- - the skin removal is for cosmetic purposes . This is generally understood to extend to persons who have meaningful weight loss that leaves them with excess skin . So , you may have done the right thing by losing a lot of weight but you may have to reconcile yourself to living longer with a flabbier body or privately pay for cosmetic surgery . 2 -RRB- Yes Scenario -LRB- uncommon but not rare -RRB- - where medically necessary criteria are met . There are circumstances where there can be recurring health problems caused by skin overhang -LRB- yeast infections , sores and rashes , infections , etc. -RRB- that can be remedied or mitigated by removing the overhanging skin , a Panniculectomy . This is not the same procedure as what is commonly referred to as a `` tummy tuck . '' The Punniculectomy only removes the overhanging skin and does not address the stretching of abdominal muscle that can also occur and which is commonly addressed in the `` tummy tuck '' procedure . As such , depending upon the terms of your policy and how a claim is coded I can foresee the situation where both procedures are performed -LRB- if the doctors went on and did the more invasive abdominal muscle procedures while `` they were in there '' and this was done with your prior consent or request -RRB- and part of the procedureis covered by the policy and the other part being deemed for cosmetic purposesand not being covered .
A little more context would have helped here . I will presume you are asking about staying on your husband 's group health insurance . Here you can get a definitive Yes and No . It really is now a matter of the husband 's employer 's personnel policies . As a general rule in 2o14 , employers who are offering group health insurance to their employees also make that coverage available to the employee 's dependents , including spouses . One of the oddities of the Affordable Care Act is that it does not define spouses as being eligible dependents . So , technically , as long as they offer coverage to dependent children , an employer could actually exclude spouses from coverage under the terms of its group health plan and be within the letter of the law . Very few employers have taken things to the extreme of completely dropping spouses from eligibility . You do , however , see a growing move to either require working spouses who have coverage available from their job to enroll in their employer 's coverage or even more commonly , such spouses are assessed a higher premium from their spouse 's health plan if they could be covered elsewhere and waive that coverage . This is an area where employer policies are evolving rapidly so it will be wise to stay up to date on these matters with your husband 's coverage .
Skin tags are benign growths on the skin that can form anywhere but are most common on the eyelid , face , neck , armpit or groin . Removal is a relatively simple and painless outpatient procedure . In most cases skin tags do not pose a medical problem and removal is for cosmetic reasons . In some situations the tag may be in a place on the body where clothing rubs against it and it becomes quite unpleasant . In those situations it is possible your carrier will pay for removal of the skin tag .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does The VA Accept Medicare ?
The VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- requires that you receive care at their facilities and with their providers in order to receive VA benefits . Thus , the VA does not accept Medicare , as Medicare only works with Medicare approved facilities and providers . Many veterans use Medicare for their major medical expenses but use VA benefits to fill in the gaps . However , the VA drug plan covers more than Medicare Part D covers .
The VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- requires that you receive care at their facilities and with their providers in order to receive VA benefits . Thus , the VA does not accept Medicare , as Medicare only works with Medicare approved facilities and providers . Many veterans use Medicare for their major medical expenses but use VA benefits to fill in the gaps . However , the VA drug plan covers more than Medicare Part D covers .
Yes , Medicare can be secondary to VA. . The two do not work together ; the VA only covers services provided at VA facilities and Medicare does not cover care provided at VA facilities . But if the VA approves care outside their providers , Medicare might cover it . As far as drug coverage goes , VA drug coverage does not have a premium and covers most or more than the drugs covered for Medicare Part D so there may not be a need for both plans if the VA is your primary provider .
Yes , you can have VA and Medicare . However , in order to use health care benefits provided by the VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- , you must receive your health care at a VA facility . Medicare does not cover services provided by a VA facility . Medicare benefits can be a good supplement to VA benefits though , covering what the VA does not cover .
Yes , you can have both Medicare and VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- benefits . But in order to use VA benefits , you must get care at a VA facility . And Medicare does not cover services provided by a VA facility . So they are not altogether compatible . But VA benefits can be a good supplement for what Medicare does not cover , such as prescription drugs .
Treatment at VA -LRB- Veterans Administration -RRB- facilities can be a crapshoot . I hear good stories and bad so the answer is , it depends . If the VA facilities near you are well staffed and not overcrowded , you might `` get by '' with VA alone . Medicare Part A and B give you more options besides just VA facilities . Some VA pharmacies may not have the medications you need in stock and it may take weeks to receive your meds . Having Medicare Part D -LRB- drug plan -RRB- allows you to purchase your Rx via mail order or at a local pharmacy . Medicare Part A and B , along with a good Medicare supplement plan expands your options and may provide shorter wait times for care .
I would advise enrolling in both Medicare Part A and B even though you get your medical care through the VA. . If you want to get care outside of the VA you will need to have Medicare A & B. Depending on what is going on with your health it may be important to get medical care from a doctor or hospital that is not part of the VA system . I have clients that have a Medicare Supplement with me so they can utilize doctors and hospitals outside of the VA but they still use VA doctors for some of their health care needs .
Yes , you can have both Medicare and VA Benefits . One plan will be a secondary payer . Since the Veterans Administration benefits must be used at VA facilities , usually Medicare is secondary to the VA insurance . However , sometimes VA drug benefits are a good supplemental plan to Medicare , and thus becomes the secondary payer .
The VA offers life insurance for Veterans under certain conditions : 1 -RRB- Those separating from the service may convert their Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- SGLI -RRB- to Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -LRB- VGLI -RRB- for 120 days after release from active duty . With a statement of good health this can be extended one year . 2 -RRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -LRB- S-DVI -RRB- provides life insurance to Veterans who have been given a VA rating for a new service-connected disability in the last two years . Totally disabled veterans can get free coverage . 3 -RRB- Disabled Veterans who have qualified for a VA Specially Adapted Housing -LRB- SAH -RRB- grant may obtain Veterans ' Mortgage Life Insurance -LRB- VMLI -RRB- . Unfortunately , the VA does not offer coverage to Veterans who do not meet these parameters .
Yes , you can drop Medicare Part B. For most , Medicare Part B is a `` no brainier-DO IT '' . Where else can you cover 80 % of many bills for under 150.00 per month if you are 65 , or disabled ? However , there are a few instances when it might make sense to either drop or not enroll in Part B . If you are covered by your employers standard medical coverage , you do not have to enroll in Part B. To answer whether it makes sense to drop it , there are some possible exceptions . The exception would be , If you are a veteran , and you live near a Large VA hospital whose doctors cover all the specialties , it might make sense to drop part B. Look for no help with coverage outside the VA system , however . So yes , there are times when it makes sense to do so , but understand the tradeoff and the limits that the VA system has are YOUR limits by default . Think it over carefully before you make the decision , and talk it over with your VA counselor and insurance agent ,
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Variable annuities -LRB- VA -RRB- s are a security under FINRA and an insurance product under the department of insurance . VAs have two account types : the general interest rate account and the separate sub account that uses equity and bond investments . VAs have internal charges that are paid from the contributions of the policy owner and any crediting or debiting of the accounts are applied , i.e. you can lose make or lose money .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A veteran needs Long Term Care Insurance if he/she does not want to utilize long term health care provided by the Veterans Administration . This may be due to location or some other bias the veteran has about receiving VA medical care . Or a veteran might want Long Term Care Insurance in case he/she can not qualify for full benefits or full compensation for care offered by the VA. .
Why would you want to `` pitch '' a Variable Annuity ? A VA is a useful product for those individuals who want to have upside performance , a basic death benefit , and other living benefits such as Guaranteed Minimum Income Benefits . But PRODUCT , and that includes any of the insurance based products , should be part of an overall consulting relationship where the client understand the risks and rewards of that product . The job of the financial advisor when selling a client a VA is to fact find , determine a client 's risk tolerance , and then provide choices commensurate with a client 's goals . If you do that , a Variable Annuity does n't get pitched , it becomes the product of choice by the client because of the features that it offers .
You asked a very detailed and complicated question . Your first cost is , if you are a service connected veteran , was the days and months you spent in that `` foxhole '' or some distant country that separated you from your family and friends . However , you do not have to be `` service connected '' in order to obtain treatment by the VA. . You can go through a `` annual means '' testing at VA where you are required to provide `` financial details '' including if you do have health insurance . Then you can also be classified as a `` hardship case '' by disclosing financial information and the type of treatment you need . Generally your copays are $ 8 for medication ; outpatient copays are $ 15 for non = specialist and $ 50 for specialist . If you have to be admitted , your copay is the current year Medicare deductible which was $ 840 in 2003 and has been indexing each year and will be $ 2016 in 2014
If you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- , and go to a doctor and that doctor does not accept Medicare assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- , the doctor reserves the right to bill you an `` excess charge '' . An excess charge is an amount up to 15 % above and beyond the medicare-approved amount for the services provided by the doctor . For each type of service , examination , procedure , etc. , Medicare has an approved amount they deem as a reasonable and customary charge - this is known as the `` Medicare-approved amount '' . If the doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full for services provided . If the doctor does not accept assignment , they can bill you an excess charge . For example , if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . If your Medigap plan covers excess charges , the Medigap insurance carrier will pay it for you . If the plan does not cover excess charges , you will be responsible for the payment of the excess charge . The two Medigap plans that cover excess charges are plans F and G. All of the other Medigap plans do not offer this benefit . So if you 'd like to have this benefit and do not already have a plan F or plan G , you may want to consider applying for one with a carrier . Remember , Medigap plans are standardized , so the only difference between insurance companies Medigap plans are the price they charge for it . Please note , certain states do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure law -RRB- . The states that do not allow excess charges are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . If you live in one of these states , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . Please note , those living in these states may want to consider Medigap plans C and D for price comparison to Medigap plans F and G as they provide the exact same coverage , just without the excess charge benefit , and may provide you some savings on your premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To be fair to Suze , she has online piece called The Truth About Annuities , that outlines her position on annuities and which also addresses variable annuities -LRB- VA -RRB- . While she appears to question the VA expense loads a legitimate gripe as in all investment , she seems to down play the tax deferral feature . Read her piece online to determine her position .
In order to get VA Life insurance , someone must meet one these conditions : 1 -RRB- Have converted their SGLI -LRB- Servicemembers ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- to VGLI -LRB- Veterans ' Group Life Insurance -RRB- within 120 days after separating from the Service . This can be extended one year with a statement of good health . 2 -RRB- Have been given a VA rating for a new service related disability incurred in the past two years . This qualifies them for S-DVI -LRB- Service-Disabled Veterans ' Life Insurance -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Qualified for VMLI -LRB- Veterans Mortgage Life Insurance -RRB- by virtue of being a disabled veteran who was able to get an SAH grant .
You can opt out of Part B by sending a letter to Social security asking that your Part B coverage be cancelled . I hope you have carefully weighed that decision because in order for you to have DRUG coverage yuo have to have Part A AND Part B . If you do not have Part B you can not have any coverage for Outpatient Services - doctors , lab , xrays , etc - unless you have VA coverage and then what happens if you need treatment at a non-VA facility . You need to weigh this question very thoroughly because yuou could be cutting your own throat
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Is Home Insurance Dwelling Coverage ?
Generally speaking , there are three elements included in a Homeowners ' Policy . The first is dwelling coverage . This covers damage to the building , your home . The second is Personal Property coverage which covers damage or loss of your personal belongings whether inside or outside of your home . The third is Liability coverage which protects you in the event you do something that causes damage to someone else 's property or injury to another person .
Adequate home insurance coverage is very important , and the discussion should be had with a professional independent agent . The best way to answer this question is to provide some general information for the primary/main coverage types on the home insurance policy -LRB- please note that each state and company policy coverages and requirements vary . This is why it is important to review in detail with your professional independent agent -RRB- . Dwelling value : this is the coverage limit that protects the structure/dwelling . Ideally , this coverage limit needs to be set at the proper replacement cost valuation . In the event of a total loss -LRB- fire , tornado ... -RRB- , what is the amount of insurance coverage on your dwelling that you would need to get you back in that exact same house?The answer to this question is the dwelling amount coverage limit that your home insurance policy should have . Personal property/contents coverage limit : this is the coverage that provides protection for your personal belongings . It is suggested to take pictures of your belongings -LRB- especially your more valuable items -RRB- as well as have copies of the pictures and any receipts to provide proof of ownership in the event of a claim . Again , like with the dwelling value we discussed above , the question here is what is the value of all of your items in your house ? Or , what would thecost be toget everythingwhat you have now in your house if a fire or tornado destroyed it all?The answer to this question is the personal property contents limit that your home insurance policy should have . Also - please note that if you have a mortgage on your home , most often the lender will require the loan amount or 100 % ofthecalculated structurereplacement value to be the required dwelling coverage amount.This amount can vary , and to ensure that you are getting the coverage protection you need without overinsuring , please review with your local professional independent agent . Liability coverage/medical pay to others : this is about the least-expensive part of a home insurance policy , but it is very important to have . The minimal amount of liability coverage suggested to have for this coverage category is $ 300,000 , although usually the bump up in coverage to the $ 500,000 liability limit is usually very small . And , the medical payments to others coverage should be at $ 5000 . These coverages protect you from injury that an unrelated -LRB- visitor -RRB- sustains while on your property , or that you are deemed to be liabile -LRB- responsible -RRB- for . Please note that these are just a couple of the important insurance coverages that are included on your home insurance . There are many other coverages that might be included with the policy that you choose or there might be other suggested coverages that you can add to your home policy that gives you the extra coverage protection that you need . There is not a general coverage limit or value that is used for determining the proper coverages for your home insurance . Every client is different and so are their needs . Make sure that you review what your needs and coverage requirements are , and let an independent agent create a policy specifically for you and your needs .
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
Home Insurance comes in different Forms ... If the home is an owner occupied dwelling , the most common form is Homeowners Insurance - Form HO3 ; if the home is a tenant occupied dwelling , the most common form is a Landlords Package Insurance - Form DP3 . Most importantly , a home owner must have the correct form of insurance applicable to cover the property . There have been many instances where a home has been purchased as an owner occupied dwelling , accordingly , a Homeowners Form HO3 has been purchased to provide coverage for the home ; the home owner may or may not have intended to use the home as a rental home thereby renting the dwelling to another person or family . Following an incident , the insurance company may simply deny the claim based on the definitions clause in the policy stating that a homeowners policy is the primary residence of the titled owner . In the past 7 years , this has been a very common issue especially in California where non suspecting speculators buy a home for rental but declare the home as a primary residence . In the least , the situation is a misrepresentation of the risk to the insurance carrier ; in summary , the contract is null and void since the use does not match the definitions section of the policy . Home insurance may or may not include the following coverage ; Dwelling -LRB- Building Coverage -RRB- , Other Structures -LRB- detached structures -RRB- , Personal Property -LRB- Furniture & Belongings -RRB- , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others . Please do consult with a professional if you 're not 100 % sure of the coverage form you seek . There 's no benefit to an incorrect policy form ; also , insurance can not be purchased retroactively to correct a prior error . For more information or to obtain an automated quote today : WEBSITELINK
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
The first thing I recommend looking for is appropriate coverage . Your homeowners insurance should have enough dwelling coverage to cover not only the cost of rebuilding your home , but also cover the clearing and removal of debris is your home is destroyed . All too often , I see homeowners policies that ONLY cover the cost to rebuild . If you do n't have enough to clear the debris , you could get stuck with that cost yourself -LRB- and that cost is in the neighborhood of $ 30,000 ! -RRB- . If the cost to rebuild your home becomes MORE than your coverage , is there anything in place to help pay for that ? For example , Farmers Insurance will include an extra 25 % of the dwelling coverage . So , if your home coverage is $ 100,000 , and it ends up cost $ 125,000 to rebuild your home , Farmers Insurance would pay that amount -LRB- minus your home deductible -RRB- . The final thing I would point out would be the deductible . In many cases , if you have never had a claim , you can have a lower deductible . However , many insurance companies are moving to a higher deductible model -LRB- usually as a percentage of the dwelling coverage -RRB- . So , if your dwelling coverage is $ 200,000 , your deductible would be 1 % of the dwelling , or $ 2,000 . I recommend finding a company that offers a deductible you feel comfortable paying .
Renter 's dwelling insurance or rental dwelling insurance ? Renters insurance , or dwelling insurance ? There are two directions to travel on this question . First , renters insurance is coverage for a non-owner occupant of an apartment or residential dwelling . We often use the term `` tenant '' or `` renter '' to describe this person or family . Since the tenant does n't own the structures the primary objective under a tenant or renters policy is to cover their personal property , additional living expenses after a loss we insure , and personal liability . A Renters Insurance Policy -LRB- Or Tenant Insurance Policy -RRB- is one of the various forms of Homeowner Insurance that has been modified to reflect the unique needs of a non-owner occupant of residential property . Rental dwelling insurance is coverage purchased by the owner of the residential dwelling to protect their interest in an apartment or dwelling occupied by someone else . It is n't required that the property be non-owner occupied under such dwelling policies , but typically , this is the case since most homeowners insurance policies afford a much better coverage and premium value than a dwelling policy . Dwelling policies can be used in a number of circumstances from those where the owner occupies the property , to those where a non-owner occupant resides in the home . A dwelling type policy is frequently used to provide coverage for a dwelling in the `` course of construction '' or when it is undergoing significant renovation . When used in this way it is not uncommon for the policy to be referred to as `` builders risk '' insurance . This type of policy is sold to the owners of property and not to builders . Builders can obtain coverage for their exposures to loss in these cases from a commercial liability and property policy they maintain for their operations . The builder would have only a financial interest in the property to the extent of their unpaid work and material so some form of policy coverage or endorsement that extends the value of property and services they have installed in such a dwelling would be the best method of providing coverage . After all , we always have to be concerned with the `` insurable interest '' and the only one with a true interest to the totality of loss would be the property owner and not a builder or contractor .
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Homeowners Insurance typically includes coverage for your actual home -LRB- the Dwelling Coverage -RRB- , coverage for separate structures -LRB- such as detached garage or shed -RRB- , coverage for your belongings -LRB- both the items inside your home , as well as items that may be outside of the home -RRB- , liability protection -LRB- coverage that protects you if you are sued -RRB- , and medical payment coverage -LRB- an amount thatcan paid to someone that is injured on your property -RRB- . These 5 items are usually included in any homeowners policy -LRB- renters and landlord policies have variations of these -RRB- . However , some insurance companies also include some extras at no additional cost . For instance , Farmers Insurance includes an extended coverage of 125 % of the dwelling coverage . This means that if the cost to rebuild the home exceeds the amount of dwelling coverage , Farmers Insurance will cover an extra 25 % over and above the dwelling coverage . Farmers Insurance also includes ID theft protection , and a few other extras .
Homeowners Insurance consists of Dwelling Coverage -LRB- Home -RRB- , Other Structures , Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- , Loss of Use and Personal Liability Coverage . To answer the question , the Dwelling Coverage should be sufficient to rebuild the home from the ground up following a covered total loss ; this would be a total reconstruction estimate to rebuild the home . Most insurance carriers have a method of calculating the replacement cost of a dwelling based on the characteristics input when you request the initial quotation ; in most cases , this is a safe number to properly insure the home . Regarding Personal Liability Insurance , it is a good idea to purchase the maximum limit available since this coverage is very inexpensive and is not subject to any deductible . Most carriers offer a maximum limit of $ 500,000 for Personal Liability . If in the process of purchasing the necessary coverage , the consumer is attempting to generate a lower premium charge , it would be a good idea to accept a high deductible which will prove to offer a much lower premium with relatively low risk to the insured . There is a system available to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States . An exemplary online experience for all with the ability to select different options and adjust your home insurance quote as necessary . WEBSITELINK
When you establish a Home Insurance policy , some of the coverage is automatically included , and some of the coverage is optional . Let 's take a look at the included coverage first . Coverage A - Dwelling : This is the primary coverage for the policy and dictates the amount of some of the other included coverage limits . This is the amount that the insurance company will pay up to in the case of any claims . From a simple window breakage due to storm damage , or a total loss due to fire , the maximum the policy will pay during any one policy period -LRB- typically a year -RRB- would be the amount shown on this coverage Coverage B - Other Structures : This coverage is for fences , detached garages , unattached decks or gazebos and etc. . The limit on this coverage is typically a percentage of Coverage A , for example 10 % of the amount of your dwelling limits . This coverage is in addition to Coverage A , meaning if a loss damaged more than just the dwelling , you can collect on both . Coverage C - Personal Property : This is the limit the policy will pay to replace your belongings , furniture , clothing , and etc. . Typically this is 50 % of Coverage A , and again this is in addition to Coverage A. Coverage D - Loss of Use : If there was a claim initiated on your property , and you had to find temporary residence while repairs were being made , or the home was simply no longer livable , this would be the coverage that would apply . Typically this is 30 % of Coverage A and would be in addition as well . On top of these coverage limits , you can have additional coverage through either automatically included or optional extensions of coverage . These can include , but are not limited to : Debris Removal ; Cyber Theft Protection ; Credit Card and Forgery ; Trees , Shrubs and Plants ; Fire Department Service Charge ; Ordinance or Law ; Glass Breakage ; and additional riders to increase personal property coverage above limits . For example , the policy might restrict replacement of Money/Gold/Coins to only $ 200 per claim . Or Jewelry , Furs , Precious Stones to $ 1000 per item / $ 5000 per claim . These riders would increase coverage for those specific items you might have that are of greater value . Finally , there is coverage for Personal Liability , which is included in most policies , but is not calculated as a percentage of Coverage A. Typically the limits provided for this coverage start at $ 100,000 and can be as high as $ 1,000,000 or more in some States . This coverage would apply if you were ever personally sued for any activity other than a vehicle accident , as your auto policy would cover that . I know that 's a lot to think about . I highly recommend you meet with a licensed insurance agent in your area to have them walk you through all of the options available and help select the right amount of insurance for your individual needs .
Many carriers will issue a homeowner policy form to cover a home construction project when it is new construction . You may also use a `` builders risk '' dwelling policy form when a homeowner policy is n't permitted . Most carriers offer one option or the other . If a homeowner policy is used the `` vacancy an unoccupancy '' provisions can not be enforced during construction or renovation . Make sure to ask these questions of your agent or carrier to make sure coverage applies while under construction . You should also control the insurance and you should not insure the builder in that process . The primary issue here is one of what we refer to as `` insurable interest '' . Quite simply , you have the most to lose in a loss of the home and as a consequence you need to buy insurance to protect both your property interest and provide the lender with protection for the collateral -LRB- your dwelling -RRB- used in the loan . The building or contractor may have an interest in installed materials up to the point they make a draw for the installations , but their interest ends at that point because they do n't have an ownership position in the home . They can purchase `` installation '' coverage in their insurance package that will protect them for the value of their work installed and it is not expensive coverage so they should have this already . Do not agree to assume responsibility for their liability either . If it is their construction site , it is their responsibility to maintain as best as possible to minimize the potential liability exposures . That said , you should make sure to purchase and maintain personal liability for the property too for any potential risk of loss that would be excluded by the building in the site management . Alternately , some carriers will amend current policies to add the new address for liability and then you would n't need to have this coverage added to your builders risk coverage . By the way , the dwelling policy form permits -LRB- in many instances -RRB- the addition of endorsements that provide coverage for the value of material delivery to the site that you might have purchased . These building materials are subject to theft and it is a good idea to know if the builder or you are responsible for materials delivered to the site . Also , a dwelling policy should be created to the new total value of the improvements and original structure on either a replacement cost or actual cash value basis . I suggest replacement cost . Insurance to value is important even on this type of policy . Carriers using the dwelling form of coverage will pro-rate valuation to an average state of completion for premium calculation , but valuation at the time of loss is also tricky so keep good records so you can rebuild the entire structure after a major loss . Cleaning up the concepts here also makes it necessary to make sure that the contractor has general liability and workers compensation insurance . If they have vehicles that operate on the property you should also insist that they provide evidence of vehicle insurance . In every instance above , you should be listed as an `` additional insured '' and `` certificate holder '' during the performance of the construction tasks . If possible , ask them to waive subrogation . Get evidence in writing . A commonly used form is the `` Acord 25 '' Certification of Liability Insurance form and this is commonly provided ask for and get written evidence of coverage as noted above .
Home Insurance , Hazard Insurance or Property Insurance are synonymous general terms . 1 - 4 unit homes are usually protected by a Homeowners Insurance Policy -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy -LRB- Tenant Occupied -RRB- . The Homeowners Insurance Policy covers the Dwelling , Detached Structures , Personal Property , Loss of Use , Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others most commonly written on Form HO-3 published by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . It is important to study the features and perils covered ; for example , damage caused by Earthquakes and/or Floods is not covered . The Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy covers the Dwelling , Detached Structures , Loss of Rent , and Premises Liabilitymost commonly written on Form DP-3 published by the Insurance Services Office -LRB- ISO -RRB- . It is important to study the features and perils covered ; for example , damage caused by Earthquakes and/or Floods is not covered . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
There are several factors that can increase premium in a homeowners insurance policy . One could be the cost of construction . Since the home must be insured with enough dwelling coverage to cover the home in a total loss you my see an increase in dwelling coverage thereby an increase in premium . Also age of the home can be a factor . In brand new homes most insurance carriers give big discounts for up to 10 years . As the home ages the discount diminishes until gone . Generally all other factors aside the home can remain in a stable position until the home becomes around 30 yrs old which can at that time start increasing premium do to the risk increasing . Another factor is just a rate change by the carrier mostly due to high losses in any given area . And of course your claims history is a factor .
The word dwelling just simply means the primary structure or the home it self . So for your question dwelling insurance is home insurance or landlord insurance which is still the home in question . If you look at a declarations pages of a policy you will notice Coverage A which is refereed to as Dwelling .
Homeowners Insurance primarily covers damage due to fire and other covered perils to the primary residence of the titled owner of the dwelling insured . Homeowners Insurance is defined as an insurance contract to protect owner occupied dwellings . For homes that are tenant occupied , a Landlords or Dwelling Fire policy would be needed . Homeowners Insurance will cover the dwelling -LRB- house -RRB- , other structures -LRB- garage , gazebo , guesthouse -RRB- , personal property -LRB- furniture , appliances -RRB- , loss of use -LRB- additional living expenses -RRB- , guest medical payments , and personal liability -LRB- for family residents -RRB- . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
New York Homeowners Insurance cost will depend on what is being insured . Home Insurance covers the replacement cost of the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal liability and medical payments to others . The age , size and construction characteristics of the home will dictate the reconstruction cost which will be used as the Dwelling Coverage Amount . If you are looking for a lower premium than generated , we would recommend selecting a higher deductible option . The deductible does not apply to Liability and Medical Payment claims ; however , it is the amount deducted from a loss payout for physical loss to the dwelling , other structures and/or personal property as covered on the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy New York Home Insurance online ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
There are many factors that affect the policy premium pricing . Therefore , more questions than answers ... initially ... First of all , what State are we talking about , since rates vary greatly from State to State , not to mention significant regional variations within a State ? For one example , think of a coastal location exposure to wind vs. a dwelling located inland and not generally exposed to the same potential perils . Which one is going to present the highest chance of risk for wind damage losses ? This will definitely affect the premium . Additionally , one insurance company 's rates can vary greatly from those of another . Also , a few of the many other questions : What is the amount of intended insurance needed on the dwelling ? How old is the home ? What type of construction ? What type of fire protection and proximity to the dwelling ? What other types of protection devices and method of monitoring ? Any dangerous animal breeds ? Swimming pool ? You really need to talk to an agent about rates in your location . Ask for quotes from the strongest carriers . Ask particularly about their financial strengths and claims paying histories . Try to get carriers with A.M Best ratings of A or better , if at all possible . Additionally , many State Insurance Departments have consumer information for the public , relating to homeowner polices . Do some of your own ` on-line ' research , if possible . You can also ask other homeowners in your area about their carriers ' pricing and experiences with claims .
There are many reasons why a home insurance policy would increase . Homes are insured for replacement of dwelling or in other words , what does it cost to build . If cost of construction and materials increases then replacement cost will increase which means your dwelling amount , or the amount to insure increases , which of course causes an increase in premium . Other factors could be regional rate adjustment do to losses . Also age of your home could be a factor . Claims you may have made could be a factor . Did you un-package your auto policy from your home could be a factor . There are many factors which should be discussed with your agent to determine premium changes and what if anything can be done to adjust the rate .
Homeowners insurance is comprised of several variables but I 'll discuss some of the major components . First and foremost you want a Replacement Cost policy . Second , you need to work with your agent to determine the proper amount of Replacement Cost coverage -LRB- the cost to rebuild your home -RRB- . Once this amount is determined the other coverage lines are a percentage of the dwelling coverage . Here 's an example of the major components : Dwelling - $ 500,000 Other Structures - $ 50,000 -LRB- 10 % -RRB- Personal Property - $ 350,000 -LRB- 70 % -RRB- Next , you need to select your deductible . Deductibles typically range from $ 500 - % of your dwelling coverage . I recommend at least a $ 1,000 deductible because you do not want to file small claims on a home policy . There are other optional coverages that are very important such as Water/Sewer Backup and Law and Ordinance coverage . Identity Theft and scheduled items can also be added . As always it 's best to discuss your options with an independent agent who can present several options specific to your needs .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Cash Out My Life Insurance ?
If there is cash value in your life insurance , and it is of a value more than any loans or fees or surrender charges that would need to be paid , you can cash it out . There are other options for your policy , as well , such as reducing the face amount so that you no longer have to pay premiums on the policy . Or taking a loan from your policy . Or taking dividends as cash . Before you give up a permanent policy that has built up cash value , you should explore these other options .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
First , let me say I am not an accountant or tax expert at all . This questions would be best answered by a Certified Public Account or other tax pro . I can only speak to my personal situation . For years we did n't have a group plan through my company and I had individual/familycoverage that I paid for out of pocket . I also have family members who have some health issues that included specialists , a lot of RX drugs , etc. . Simply due to the cost of the health coverage , we had to go with a high deductible health plan as well . So , over the course of a year we would have our health premiums , high deductibles , plus a bunch of specialist costs that were not even covered by our insurance . This generated a ton of dollars that came out of my pocket personally . There is a threshold for medical expences -LRB- I do n't remember what it is -RRB- where anything over an above that figure is deductible on your tax return . I have been well over that figure every year for the last 5 or 6 , so I have been able to deduct a good amount of my out of pocket expence . This is just my personal situation and again , I am not a tax professional of any sort . All this was done on the advice of my personal accountant . I would highly recomend you contact a tax professional and discuss your individual situation with them .
Life insurance is one of the investments that allows an individual to trade a low monthly ; payment for a life insurance policy that has a protection amount that is much higher than my monthly payment . If my monthly payment is $ 100 month and I have a policy of $ 500,000 do you consider that money well spent . The Life Insurance policy can aslo enable tax managment strategies if it is a `` cash value '' policy '' . The `` cash value '' builds and as long as I do not withdraw the earnings it is not taxable . So if I have had this policy for 18 years and my `` baby '' is now grown and driving my Subaru and needs money to go to college I can pull the cash value at intervals that allows me to minimize my consequences and my `` baby '' slides off to college . Is that a good `` investment vehicle '' ? Life Insurance also enables Estate Planning strategies enabling me to pass assets to my children without huge tax consequences .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
It may not be a good idea to get more life insurance after getting a new mortgage . You may have enough already . Heres how you could find out . Ask yourself the following : Do I have enough coverage so that my spouse can pay off the mortgage if I pass away ? What if I take out a second mortgage ? Do I have enough coverage for that as well ? What if I feel I have enough coverage for both the mortgage and my dependents - but then have another kid ? Then I would need more of the benefit to replace my income , and so would have less to cover the bank debt . How about any other family obligations ? Are my parents financially secure ? Any chance one or both would become dependent on me ? If so , that would create a demand for more coverage . Any business obligations ? Is my partnership agreement funded ? The services of my key people indemnified ? Bank debt insured ? Estate preservation ? Charitable gifts ? Can you see where I am headed with all these questions ? If you have completed a financial needs analysis , covering both current and future needs for life insurance , then you could be pretty sure whether or not you have enough coverage . If you are like most other people , you dont . You will probably end up buying another policy :-RRB- .
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
You should purchase life insurance when you feel it is appropriate . I purchased my first whole life policy when I was 18 years old . I wanted to pay for my final expenses , establish my insurability and I looked to the policy to help me save money in a disciplined manner . When I married , I increased my policy to provide for my brides needs should I die prematurely . I still buy life insurance and am contemplating an additional purchase .
You can only cash out life insurance that has a cash value build-up . Permanent life insurance programs -LRB- including both universal and whole life policies -RRB- bulid cash value - term insurance programs do not build cash value . If you 're looking to cash out your policy , there are a number of things to consider before deciding whether to cash out any life insurance policy . One of the things that most people do n't think about is their insurability , especially when they have an existing plan . They may have preferred rates at the time they got it , but are now being treated for some medical conditions -LRB- heart issues , diabetes , cancer , etc. -RRB- and may be looking at standard or substandard rates on a new plan if they decided to get coverage again later on . If you 're looking at securing new coverage / replacing the old policy , you should compare the two structures and make sure it 's the most favorable course of action for you . Another item to review on the policy before cashing out is whether there are still any surrender charges on the policy and whether there would be any taxable gains -LRB- the cash value is greater than the sum total of premiums paid into the policy -RRB- - these 2 items can affect how much money you actually receive if you cashed out the policy . I highly recommend consulting with an experienced insurance broker who can review all of these points and others with you so you can make sure it 's an optimal move for you . After all things considered and you still want to cash out the policy , you can call the carrier/contact your agent and tell them you want to terminate the coverage -LRB- the amount you receive would be less any surrender charges or loan fees , if applicable -RRB- and they 'll send you the necessary paperwork Depending on the size of the cash out , an option to consider would be putting the money into an annuity to guarantee an income for the rest of your life -LRB- or for a fixed number of years -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any questions . Thanks very much .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is The Best Term Life Insurance ?
The best term life insurance policy is the policy that is scheduled to terminate the day after you die . The company would then pay the full death benefit but will probably have collected the least amount of premium . Unfortunately few in society know the day when they will die . Then you need to select a policy that covers you for the period of time when the need is greatest .
The best term life insurance policy is one that fits your TEMPORARY needs . Ask yourself what you are using the life insurance for . If it is to cover the cost of your home mortgage , or your business loan , simply get coverage for that amount . * Example : You have 15 years left to pay off your mortgage and it 's currently $ 150,000 pay off . You can get a 15 year term life policy for $ 150,000 . The only problem with this solution is that most people have other outstanding debts that need to be addressed . Think about what it would cost to replace YOUR income if you no longer were here . Do you have Kids ? Do you want them to attend college ? What 's the cost of that ? So in the example above , $ 150,000 would not be enough . The best term life insurance policy would be one that would completely get you out of debt , pay off your loans , and leave additional money to your family to replace your income so your family can continue on with lifestyle of living they are accustomed to . You can find all kinds of life insurance cost calculators online to help you determine the right amount for you !
The best Term Life Insurance is a policy that will cover your need for it . E.g. . If you have a business loan that you will pay off over the next 10 years , 10 year Term Life Insurance may be your best choice . However , if you do n't have a set need , getting a policy that will last until the date that the policy can last be converted can be a good choice . E.g. Let 's say you are 40 and the policy is convertible to the end of the term or age 70 , whichever comes first . If you get a 30 year term policy , you will have inexpensive coverage for the next 30 years . Perhaps you no longer need life insurance at age 70 , so you can just drop your coverage when the term ends . On the other hand , you may develop a serious illness and not want to lose your policy . Converting your current term policy to a permanent one can be a wonderful option to have in this situation .
What life insurance is the best depends on what purpose you want the life insurance for . The best way to answer your questions is to give an overview of the different types and then you can decide which one is best for you . Term insurance is the easiest to understand . You pay a specified premium for coverage for a specified term . Typical terms are 10 , 20 or 30 years . At the end of the term the policy renews at a higher premium for a new term until the policy expires . This type of coverage is temporary because the policy will expire at a specified time for example age 85 . Term policies are usually convertible to permanent insurance before before age 65 for example . Term insurance is best to provide the most coverage for a given premium today . Whole life insurance is as the name suggest permanent insurance with coverage for the whole of your life , It pays when you die not if you die before the policy expires . Whole life has a level premium and with some policies the premium can be paid up early for example 20 years or age 65 . The by-product of the level premium is a build up of cash value . If the policy is participating the build of cash can be even greater . Level premium , build up of cash , increasing death benefit and hands off management make whole life a premium product . It is regarded by many as the best . Universal life is a permanent insurance policy that can be in force the whole of your life if it is managed properly . The good news is the premium is flexible and you have a choice how the cash reserve is invested , The bad news is that the premium is flexible and you have choice how the cash reserve is invested is flexible , Universal life can be the best if properly managed . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies could help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
Interestingly enough , I am often asked the question , what is the best life insurance ? There is however , no overall best type that provides all solutions . What is best for you depends on your circumstances and what you want to accomplish . Universal life because of the flexibility is considered by many to be the `` best '' . Whole life and term products could also be the `` best '' , again depending on the circumstances and what you wanted to accomplish . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The word `` best '' is so subjective . Best what ? Best rates ? Best underwriting ? Best customer service ? Best claims payment history ? When you look at Insurance , compare it to purchasing an automobile . You have Mercedes , BMW , Toyota , Ford , Chrysler , Volvo . Which car is best ? Thats hard to say . Each of these makers produce cars that will start and take you to your destination . They can come with a lot of the things that make our car ride enjoyable . But what do you want ? Comfort ? Style ? Good gas mileage ? Ability to be driven for years ? High mileage capability ? It all depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay to get it . Insurance is the same way . Talk to an agent and clearly define what you want . Then look for companies that offer that product . Then you can compare prices , look into how they handle claims , customer service , etc. . Finally , realize that most Insurance companies -LRB- due to heavy regulations -RRB- have to meet certain standards to remain an Insurance company . That being said you can usually find a good fit for your circumstances if you do your research .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy is the one that is going to do what you want it to for what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Pay for any damage to your home ? The Best policy would guaranty your home would be repaired or rebuilt if damaged by any cause . All policies will have exclusions or limitations . The Best policy will have the fewest exclusions or limitations . Reimburse you for loss or damage to your personal property ? The Best policy will repair or replace -LRB- new for old -RRB- your property should it be damaged from any cause . Again , most policies will have exclusions and limitations , the Best policy will have the fewest exclusions and limitations . The Best policy will include a Personal Liability limit not less than $ 300,000 and offer a good Personal Umbrella should you need or want higher limits . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur and help you return to your pre-loss position . In my opinion , the Best policy will be the one that will do all the above for the most favorable premium .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy for you is the one that is going to do exactly what you want it to for approximately what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Most likely , fix your house or repair or replace your personal things should they be damaged . If so , the Best policy for you would be the one that would guaranty just that . No policy will do that as all policies have some exclusions and limitations , but the Best policy for you would have the fewest exclusions or limitations . I suggest the Best policy would include Guaranteed Replacement Cost and all-risk * coverage on your home , all-risk * Replacement Cost coverage on your personal property . The Best policy for you would include Personal Liability coverage with a limit not less than $ 300,000 . Should you need higher limits , a good Personal Umbrella endorsement should be available providing a broad insuring agreement and few exclusions . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur , treat you professionally and help you return to your pre-loss position . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer who would not cancel you or increase your premium the first time you had a claim . The Best policy would be offered by an insurer willing and able to insure your car -LRB- s -RRB- at a reasonable price even though you might have young inexperienced drivers . If an insurance company is not willing to do provide these essential services , I question if they should be considered for any part of your business .
There is no one best life insurance company , and no one best type of life insurance policy . Life insurance companies are rated by rating agencies -LRB- AM Best , Standard and Poore 's , Moody 's and Fitch are the most popular -RRB- . You can look at their ratings with each agency to see how life insurance companies compare with each other . Regarding types of life insurance policies , sometimes Whole Life is best , sometimes Universal Life best suits a particular need , sometimes Term Life works best . To find the best company and policy for you and your particular need , you can visit with a reputable agent and ask them to find you the best qualify product that is suitable for your needs .
Term Life Insurance is coverage that will pay out if you die before the end of the term . E.g. Let 's say you have 10 year term life insurance and let it go when the term ends , because you do not want to pay the higher premium that begins at year 11 . If you die midway through year 11 , the policy will not pay a death benefit . In contrast to that , Non Term Life Insurance will pay out for as long as it is set up to pay out . Most people select a non term policy that will last their entire lifetime . There are other differences between Term and Non Term -LRB- usually called Permanent -RRB- Life Insurance . Permanent Life Insurance can have cash values , whereas Term Life Insurance almost never has cash values . You can design Permanent Life Insurance to be paid up in a certain number of years , so that you do n't have to bother with paying premiums later in life . Term Life does not have that option . Some Permanent policies are more flexible than Term . As you might expect , the cost of Term Insurance is usually less than is the cost of Non Term Insurance . It can be helpful to discuss your needs with an experienced agent so that you can balance cost with getting the best type of coverage for your needs .
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
What do you need to know about term life insurance ? You need to know that : 1 -RRB- Unless you have some type of rider stating otherwise , term life insurance will jump way up in price at the end of the term , and go up in price annually after that . Or it will end at the end of the term . 2 -RRB- Most term life insurance will stay the same premium during the entire term , and the death benefit will stay the same for the entire term . But you need to ask your agent to make sure you are buying a guaranteed level premium , and a guaranteed level death benefit , to be sure . 3 -RRB- There is no cash value in term life insurance . Only ROP -LRB- return of premium -RRB- term will pay back a substantial cash value if you keep it enough years , and are alive at the end of the term . 4 -RRB- If you miss a payment more than two months , your term policy will end . There is no cash value in it to pay the premium , so it is very important to keep up your payments with term life insurance . 5 -RRB- Many term policies are convertible to permanent insurance for at least part of the term period . If you convert your term policy , you must convert it to the policy or policies stipulated by the life insurance company at that point in time . These policies may or may not have lifetime guarantees , but will be UL or WL . The rate will be based on your age at the time of conversion . There are no health requirements ; your permanent policy will be rated similarly to what your term policy was rated .
The all time best company for term life insurance is the one with the best product at the best price for your unique situation . In other words , the best term life insurance policy for your neighbor is not necessarily the best term life policy for you . There are many factors that determine that . I advice using an experienced independent broker to find the best deal for your unique situation .
To know the best type of life insurance for you , I 'd need to know some things about you . 1 -RRB- Above all , what are your needs for your life insurance ? Do you want a small policy to use for your funeral and other final expenses ? Do you want a policy that would get your three teenagers established if something happened to you ? The best life insurance for those two scenarios are very different . Discerning your purpose for your life insurance helps professionals such as myself figure out the best type and amount of coverage you need . 2 -RRB- How old are you ? Do you have any health problems ? Do you smoke ? Questions such as this give us the tools to find your best rate . 3 -RRB- What is available for you ? This is a questions we agents must answer . Some life insurance agents carry one brand of life insurance , others offer policies from scores of companies . Some agents will push one type of policy on you , others will hunt around for your best option , even if they have to refer you elsewhere . You can save a lot of time and frustration by starting with an agency who will go the extra mile to find your best type of life insurance , right from the start .
Term Life Insurance does not have cash value , but if you get what is called Return of Premium Term -LRB- ROP Term -RRB- , it has a form of cash value . About midway through the term , depending on the policy , it will pay back some of the premiums paid in , IF you cancel the policy . By the end of the term , this type of policy will generally pay back all the premiums you paid in . Some negatives : This cash is not available unless you surrender the policy . If you are table rated , it may be that only the premiums up to standard are paid back to you . The price is substantially higher than regular Term Life Insurance . Some positives : If you bought regular Term Life and invested the extra you would have spent on ROP Term , it could take a return of over 5 % every year on the difference , to earn what you would get back , tax free , by keeping ROP Term to the end . Unlike regular Term , longer terms often cost less than shorter terms , with ROP Term . Finally , getting back all your premiums if you are still alive at the end of the term is a great way to have `` free '' coverage and then get back enough for a final expense fund when the term ends .
Whole life is not necessarily better than term insurance , but it can be . Whole life provides coverage , as the name suggests , for the whole of your life , it does not expire like most term policies . Whole life policies usually have cash values which grow in a tax advantaged way . In addition , whole life can provide additional financial and retirement planning opportunities . With term insurance you pay for the coverage and in most cases that is what you get - life insurance at a specified price for a specified term . If you need coverage for the long term , then whole life could be better . If you need coverage for the short term , then term insurance could be better . Another product to consider is Universal Life which could be better . What policy is right for you depends on your individual situation . An independent insurance broker can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
What will disqualify you from life insurance ? Well depends on you mean by disqualify as there are many forms of life insurance out there at many different price levels . There are guaranteed issue plans , credit life and a few that will insure a person for a very high premium . What you might be asking instead is what will disqualify you from the best possible rates for life insurance ? Your health is what will get you very good rates or high rates if your health is poor . There are also possible issues with travel , credit and occupations and hobbies . But , the best price is usually tied to best possible health . You are your discount .
When purchasing life insurance it is always best , in my opinion , to sit down with a good experienced reputable agent and discuss your needs . There are a variety of products . While price is a consideration it should never be the deciding factor . If a product seems a lot cheaper than other like products there is a reason that you probably will not know about until it is too late . Consider these factors : What is the purpose of the insurance ? Is it to cover a long term need such as final expenses , or a short term need such as a mortgage ? You should use permanent insurance such as whole life to cover a long term need . Term insurance comes in all kinds of packages . One year term , 5 , 10 , 20 , and 30 are the most common . There is level term and decreasing term . Level term the death benefit stays level , decreasing term the death benefit decreases . Term insurance can be renewable or non renewable . It can be convertible to whole life or non convertible . In some term policies the rate can be adjusted according to the companies mortality history , thus it allows for premium increase . Term insurance premiums go up at each renewal . As you can see there are a variety of factors involved when buying life insurance . Unless you know and really do a lot of research on the different policies you may not purchase the best product that will meet your goals . A good independent insurance agent who specializes in life insurance and represents multiple companies can help you find the right product for your individual situation .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will My Homeowners Insurance Increase After A Claim ?
It is entirely possible that your Homeowners Insurance may increase upon renewal as a result of claim activity . However , that having been said , it also depends upon the company and cirsumstances of the claim , the type of claim and amount paid for the loss and your long term history with the company . Always check with your insurance porofessional to understand your particular coverage , terms and conditions of the policy .
Several factors are considered when calculating a rate for homeowners insurance . Claim history is a factor along with credit , length of time you 've been insured with the same company , type of home , type of claim , claim severity ect ... Just because you file a claim does not guarantee a rate increase however there 's a pretty good chance this will happen if you 've only been with your insurance company for a short period of time .
Homeowners Insurance is a contract whereby a homeowner transfers his/her risk to an insurance carrier in return for a contract and a small premium . Homeowners Insurance Premium will usually increase from year to year ; however , by chance a decrease may be seen once in a while . Insurance companies increase the Dwelling Coverage each year to keep up with the increasing cost of reconstruction ; after all , homeowners insurance 's primary purpose is to rebuild a home in the unfortunate event of a total loss . The small increase of dwelling coverage each year is usually the purpose that draws attention when the premium rises ; however , this is very insignificant . Insurance companies are audited each year and are obligated to comply with State Department of Insurance regulations in each and every State where they underwrite risk . Each year , insurance carriers calculate the necessary premium to maintain a safe financial condition and offer security to all homes insured ; the largest reason for premium increase would be ` loss experience ' during the prior year , another reason may be due to increased operational cost including but definitely not limited to reinsurance premium paid . Insurance Companies either have an internal actuarial department or hire an independent actuarial firm who are charged with the responsibility of calculating premium based on underwriting factors and prior loss data . For this reason , carriers only offer annual policies and are unable to predict risk on a longer term basis . Since carriers experience different loss results each and every year , insurance rates and increase percentages are never the same from one year to the next . Since paid losses continue to grow , claim frequency is showing growth and litigation is becoming more commonplace , insurance companies raise premium to keep up with the outflow of payments . It is important to recognize that claims and operational expenses are paid from the pool of collected policy premium . For a more detailed explanation or financial report from your current carrier , contact your carrier representative to receive a report . Also , data is available as published by the Department of Insurance in most States .
There are many companies out there and each one of them can treat a claim differently if you are asking will my rate go up . There are different types of claims that can trigger an automatic rate increase on renewal with most companies such as a water Claim -LRB- non flood -RRB- , a theft or a fire . Many companies do not increase premium if the claim is below a certain amount or threshold but you must check with your agent and carrier to be sure . Weather claims in many cases do not trigger increase in premiums but you must check with your agent and company . If you have a weather event and you are not sure if you have damage many roof and siding companies will come out and give you a free bid before you decide to call in the claim . Call your agent and discuss with them thescenarioand get advice so you can make a sound decision . Most companies do not have a problem with a homeowner with 1 claim in 3 years , but if you have more than that you could be considered a habitual claimant -LRB- even though the claims may not have been in your control -RRB- . Find an agent or agency that you can trust and do not be afraid to ask questions that come to mind . Do not find out if you have coverage for a claim after the fact and make sure your questions are answered . Keep in mind that the insurance you are purchasing is to help protect you from a financial loss so ask questions , try to get the best package and coverage that fits your family needs and then look at price .
If the cost of auto repairs hasnt increased and damages awarded in lawsuits hasnt increased , auto insurance probably shouldnt increase . Your state insurance commissioner keeps a close eye on insurance cost in your states . He does this for two reasons . The first is to make sure that the public isnt being charged too much and the second is to make sure that the insurance companies are taking in sufficient money to honor all of the promises that they have made . The real cost of automobile insurance is determined when you have a claim . If the policy limit is exceeded and angry people are suing you , you paid too much for your insurance . If your policy had high limits and took care of everything , then you bought cheap insurance . Having to settle a claim out of your own pocket is the most expensive form of insurance that you can purchase . The reason that insurance premiums increase is that the company pays out more than it can afford to pay out . It is a simple balance sheet calculation . When the company finds that they are paying out more in claims than they are receiving in premiums they file with the state insurance commissioner to review and adjust rates in your state . Several things cause the claims experience of a company to increase . It could be that the frequency of claims increases . This could be the result of reduced safety enforcement , poorer road conditions or a variety of other causes . It could be that the severity of claims has increased . This would be the result of an increasing number of accidents turning into lawsuits . It also could be caused by juries making increasingly high awards to those injured in accidents . It also could be the result of increased medical costs in your area . Another factor could be the cost of auto repairs . Materials and parts tend to become more expensive over time and this could affect the claims experience of a company . It is important to note that most companies in the state will feel similar pressure at the same time as those factors affect all the companies . There are moral factors that also come to affect the premiums of auto insurance . When drivers report fewer annual miles than they actually drive , that increases their exposure without increasing the premium for their policy . If people allow other drivers to operate their vehicles without adequate supervision of screening risky drivers could be populating the streets . Even though your state requires that vehicles be insured we all know that some are not and that expense has to be shared somewhere . A frequent abuse is the pizza delivery man who is driving the family sedan . His insurance policy never knew he was doing that and has a risk that hasnt been properly evaluated . There are far more lurid cases but my all-time favorite is the family sedan that has steel tanks welded underneath the body to carry illegal liquor . All these moral issues also affect the premium .
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
-- > Normal 0 Im sure your insurance company would say yes to that question and I would say most homeowners will find their premium does increase each year . Usually there are two reasons . Insurers increase their rates and insurers tend to increase the amount of insurance on your home by inflationary factors tied to increased construction costs in your area . But that doesnt mean your premium has to increase every year , it means it may be time to take a closer look at your policy and premium . If you want your policy to pay to rebuild your home if it is destroyed and the cost to rebuild your home has increased , increasing the amount of insurance may be appropriate . But increasing the amount of insurance does not necessarily mean your premium must increase . You may be entitled to additional credits for not filing any claims , structural updates or improvements or added security . Maybe your credit score has improved and you are eligible for more favorable rating treatment . You may even want to check with other insurers to see if they offer more favorable terms . But bottom line , there is no reason your homeowners insurance premium should go up each year . You just have to take a look at it , find out why and see what your alternatives are .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
-- > Normal 0 Whether anyone wants to admit it or not , insurance consumers tend to seek ways to reduce their insurance expenses while insurance providers are always looking for ways to increase their revenue . A rate increase is one alternative insurers might use to increase your premium but more often than not your premium frequently increases for other reasons . An insurer 's base rates are only one factor that goes into the calculation of your actual insurance premium . You should know what those factors are . The most common factor may be an increase in your amount of insurance . Your insurance company may claim construction costs in your area have increased and your amounts of insurance have been increased accordingly . That may be true but higher limits do n't always mean higher premiums . Discounts they may have applied in prior years may have changed or been discontinued . Penalties may have been applied if you had a claim or your credit score has changed . Rate categories may change as your home gets older . The reasons can be endless . But that doesnt mean you have to simply accept the increase . Question the reason for any increase . Determine if you are eligible for other discounts or credits . Consider other insurers who might offer you more favorable premium treatment . In my experience , insurers rates dont change all that often , and they can go up or down . Other factors used to calculate your final premium are usually the reason you see your premiums go up so often . Be proactive , a little effort and a few questions could save you a lot of money .
Most companies apply an increase to subsequent premiums when a homeowner has a claim . Very few homeowners have claims . The ones that do are not average . The company views such a customer as being a higher risk than normal for future claims and adjusts their rates to reflect that . Claims are not considered for a long period of time , however , and most companies remove consideration of a claim after three years .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
This is an extremely sensitive topic . The death of a spouse can be life-shattering . A suicide can make it almost unbearable . Not too long ago a friend and client committed suicide . She had been going through a tough spell emotionally , and then almost out of the blue took her own life . Left behind a loving husband and three young boys . Very , very sad . I expedited the claim , as is my usual practice . This job is usually tough , and the fact that her family and mine are friendly made it really hard . My friend , her surviving husband , was so upset he could n't even complete the claim form . I did it for him . The insurance carrier paid the claim as the policy was over two years old . That is standard practice . Will they never pay before then ? I can say that I know of a case with a very high-profile insured who apparently committed suicide just a year after his policies were issued -LRB- he had several - lots of coverage -RRB- . The carriers , of course , initially refused to pay . The insured 's lawyers eventually convinced them to do so : why would they want the bad publicity of not paying a claim ? Will they always pay after two years ? My own feeling is yes , generally , but suspicious circumstances may interfere . If the carrier has reason to believe that this tragic event had been planned to take place right after the two-year anniversary . . Sometimes life is like a mystery novel .
That is a good question . In most states coverage for auto related claims will fall under your auto insurance . Having said that , some homeowners insurance policies provide coverage for theft away from premises . The more important question is , `` What is your homeowners insurance deductible ? '' If you have a $ 500 deductible and the key FOB is $ 500 , and it was covered , you would collect $ 0 because you have n't exceeded your deductible . Even if your policy did provide coverage , and you exceeded your deductible , I would n't recommend you file a claim . Homeowners insurance is best reserved for catastrophic losses like ; wind , fire , hail , lightning , hurricanes , water damage from a pipe burst , etc. . If you file a claim for your key FOB and next week have to file another claim because of something listed above , the insurance company will have grounds to non-renew or cancel your policy . Even if they did n't cancel your policy , you could see a rate increase because of the claim that was submitted for your key FOB . Over the next few years you would likely exceed the value of the key FOB with increased insurance premium cost . The thought process by the insurance companies is `` frequency leads to severity '' and insurance companies do not like severity . Hope this answer helps .
Homeowner insurance premiums do not necessarily increase every year but they often do , for some of the following reasons . Check to see if your homeowner insurance carrier was granted a rate increase in your State . That would certainly be a reason . Absent a rate increase or increased hazards with regard to your property -LRB- new swimming pool , dangerous pets , etc. -RRB- , it is possible that your homeowner insurance carrier utilizes an automatic inflation guard feature , to account for increased construction costs in your area , including labor , materials , adherence to local building regulations , etc. . Check with your agent to review your policy . You may want to increase your deductible . You may also want to have the agent obtain rates for you from other carriers in your area . Try to get the strongest rated carriers , if pricing is competitive and coverages are what you want .
There are many possible reasons as to why your homeowners insurance premium would rise . Not all of the reasons are under your control . Some of the more obvious reasons for an increase in your homeowners insurance premium are : inflation -LRB- the insurance carrier generally incurs more costs each year -RRB- , claims that you may have filed , a change in your credit rating , an increase in homeowners claims within your carrier or your geographic area , or increases in valuation of properties in your geographic area just to name a few .
Most of the time an insurance company will not be able to increase the rate you pay on your homeowners insurance if you have a claim . If you have several claims or one large claim the company may cancel or non-renew your policy . Your rate is likely to go up while searching for the new homeowners insurance after you have been non-renewed . This is generally when most clients experience a high rate from claims
Years ago , it was n't all that uncommon to see a $ 100 deductible . Those days are gone . Today , our standard deductible is $ 500 but I sell more deductibles of $ 1.000 and $ 2,500 . There 's a reason for this . In the past , say around 25 years ago , a homeowners policy was very basic and really only covered your home and contents with a few other ancillary coverages . The consumer was different , also . They usually only filed a claim for something big like a fire or tornado . About 20 years ago or so , insurance companies thought it would be a good idea to add more coverages for smaller things like refrigerated food and others . Then , a strange thing happened : People started claiming these things . You see , big claims like fires are very infrequent and the rates were built around these rarely occurring , big losses . They were n't prepared for the more frequent small losses . Therefore , a $ 100 deductible on a total loss does n't add much to the claim . However , insurance companies began seeing a lot of smaller claims and , now , that $ 100 deductible made it beneficial to the consumer to claim that $ 400 loss . In fact , they became so frequent that it was really hurting the insurance companies profitability . Every claim requires people to process it , adjust it , and make a payment . Insurance companies were seeing these costs skyrocket and they had no choice but to raise premiums to offset these costs . They finally reached a point where they had to discourage all these small losses . The way they did it ? they made the $ 100 and $ 250 deductible options a lot more expensive . So now , a $ 500 deductible is pretty standard , with higher deductibles saving quite a bit off the premiums . What does this mean for you ? First , realize that your homeowners policy was designed to cover the catastrophic losses , not the small things that happen more often . In Michigan , if you have 3 claims in a 3 year period that are n't weather-related , your company can cancel your policy . This will leave you in a spot where you may have to pay 3 or 4 times the premium your used to until you 're eligible again . A homeowners policy is not a maintenance contract . As a homeowner , things are going to happen and the responsibility for maintaining your home is yours . My advice is this : Take care of your home and pay for the small things and take a higher deductible . You 'll probably save more before you have claim than the difference in the deductible . In the long run , you 'll be protected against the big things and you 'll have more money in your pocket .
You can always change insurance companies , there 's nothing to stop you . However , you may want to stick with what you have during a claim . Legally , an insurance company has to settle claims according to their policy whether you 're still insured with them or not . In practice , these are human beings working on your claim and they may not always give you consideration if you 've cancelled your coverage with them . Let 's look at an example . Let 's say you 've gotten into an accident and you 're car is in the body shop . You want OEM parts installed on your car , but the insurance company wants to use aftermarket parts because they cost less . They have more of an incentive to honor your request if you 're still insured with them because they see an opportunity to offset your claim with future premiums . Another factor to consider is the company you want to go to . They may not want to insure a car that has unrepaired damage . It 's totally up to the company . Now , in my experience , you would only ask the question if you do n't like how your claim is being handled . If you were totally satisfied , you would n't think about switching . My advice is to stay with your current company and negotiate with their claims department to get your claim settled to your satisfaction . Check your policy , all companies have an appeals process if you do n't agree with how your claim is being settled . Take advantage of it . You may get some consideration and a better settlement . If you 're still unsatisfied , you can always consider the courts , but this is a risky proposition unless you 're sure you 're in the right . After your claim is settled , you can explore new companies . A good agent will help you with claims if you 're not satisfied . They can not always ensure you 'll get what you want , but a good one will go to bat for you . In my opinion , finding the right advisor is the most important decision you make . In the long run , you 'll come out ahead even if they 're more expensive now . The cost of your coverage is n't just the premium , it 's what it costs you in time , money , and aggravation at claim time .
When you need to file a Homeowners Insurance Claim , the best and quickest way to handle it is to call the CLAIMS Telephone number listed on your Homeowners Insurance declarations page . Most carriers have a 24 Hour reporting line for claims ; the station is staffed by an individual trained to take an initial report and pass it on to the assigned claims adjustor based on the type of claim and geographical location of the loss . Once the preliminary report is taken , a claims number is assigned , an adjustor is assigned and the preliminary record is report to the National Database also known as CLUE ; CLUE is a tool used industry wide to review prior claims activity on homes . The CLUE report will later be updated eventual showing the Closed Status and total amount paid by the insurance carrier to resolve the claim . When making the initial claim report , it is beneficial to only offer a simple and general explanation of the nature of the loss ; it is always better to give all the details directly to the claims adjustor as the initial claims report is usually not taken by a person licensed and trained with the capabilities of the insurance adjustor.In most cases , the insurance carrier will assign and adjustor who will make an initial contact within 1 business day . The adjustor will make an appointment to come out and review the damages claimed , a detailed estimate of the required repairs will be prepared and the adjustor willinterpret the policy to determine if and to what extent coverage applies to the damage incurred ; the final process will be a resolution letter mailed to the insured with a full accounting of the situation and perhaps an associated check for repairs . In some cases , an initial payment may be offered holding back thedepreciated portion of the loss until thedamages or items are replaced after which the carrier will reimburse the insured for the full replacement cost of the items as long as the policy coverseverything on a replacement cost basis . Any specificquestions regarding a loss should be directly discussed with the claims adjustorwho is licensed and responsible to handle the complete transaction and explain the processto the insured . Prior to any claim occurrence , it may alsobe a good idea to contact a licensed insurance representative to learn the process and best recommended method of handling thesituation should youencounter a claim .
Great question ! The short answer is that it should , assuming that the damage was n't caused by some form of negligence . The thing to consider though , is this - how much was the estimate for the repair of the damages ? Would it be less than the cost you will incur if / when your premiums increase after filing a claim for that damage ? For example - the estimate to repair is $ 200 . You file a claim , and the company pays it , and then increases your premiums by $ 30 , let 's say . Your cost for insurance that year now is increased by $ 360 -LRB- 30x12 = 360 -RRB- . It cost you $ 160 to get your $ 200 work done for you . It is the same situation with auto insurance and accident claims . Be careful , and contact your agent , or other homeowners , and get an idea of what the rate increases are . You may even find that they have a `` forgiveness '' type of clause where it wo n't raise the rate . Hope that helps ! Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Life Insurance Is The Best To Buy ?
Any life insurance agent who would tell you that there is only one best kind of life insurance to buy for every situation , is the kind of agent you should take with a grain of salt . The reason life insurance companies create so many types of policies is partly because of demand . Some products simply accomplish a certain purpose better than others . A reputable life insurance agent will visit with you to help you determine the best type of policy or policies to accomplish your financial goals and protect your loved ones . And in the process of that visit , you may save money by not throwing it after something you do n't need or want , too .
The best kind of life insurance to buy is custom fit for a specific purpose . Begin with clearly identifying your need for the insurance . Next , identify the duration you may need the policy or policies . Third , work to make sure it makes sound budget sense . Last , be sure to review your policy often as you needs might change ; what might have been best for you last year , may have changed by now .
The best time to buy life insurance is the day before you die . That way you wo n't pay a penny more than you have to for your coverage ! What 's that you say ? You do n't know the day you are going to die ? Hmmm ... well then , the answer is easy : The best time to buy life insurance is now . Assuming you have a need -LRB- or a desire -RRB- for life insurance coverage , you are best served buying it sooner rather than later . Term life insurance rates are as inexpensive as they will ever be , and they will only get more expensive as you grow older . If you are interested in cash value insurance , it 's even more important that you buy it sooner rather than later . Find yourself a qualified agent and work with him or her to design a program of life insurance coverage that will address your needs and keep your overall costs down .
You should talk with an independent life insurance agent so they can review options from multiple carriers with you , help identify the risk class you 're looking at with various carriers -LRB- a critical part when looking for coverage -RRB- , and identify the policy structure that will best serve your needs and your budget . It 's also highly , highly recommended that you do NOT apply to a bunch of carriers at the same time just to see what sticks - this can be a red flag to many carriers and they 'll want to know what your plans are with each policy , total amount of coverage you plan on keeping , as well as the underwriting results from them . There is no one policy that is the best for everyone as we each have our own needs and purposes for buying life insurance . Some may buy life insurance because they just got married , some because they have a new child , some for estate planning , and some for income replacement , just to name a few reasons why people buy it . In evaluating which is best for you , there 's a number of factors to consider such as what type of coverage do you want/need , the reason you want to buy it , how much coverage and for how long -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- , premium affordability , health status , where you live , and others . One of the first things you need to do is identify the risk classification you qualify for . The risk classification is critical because this determines what the premiums will be for the policy you 're applying for . This is where insurance brokers are essential in your pursuit of coverage . They have the knowledge to guide you through the process and help you find the policy that 's going to be most suitable for you .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
The first step in buying life insurance is to determine how much coverage you need , what type of insurance will work best for your needs , and how much it will cost . With life insurance you can not just pick out the policy with the features that you like . You must qualify medically , and your overall mortality risk -LRB- or lack thereof -RRB- determines your rate . What company you use and the type of policy you choose also figure into the premium you will pay . So the best way to buy life insurance is to talk to an agent who can help you determine how much you need , explain what types of policies work best for that need , and then shop around to find the best rate for which you qualify . Good life insurance agencies stick with you and guide you through to the time when the policy you want is in your safe , ready to go into action if tragedy strikes . While a life insurance agent is the last person most people wish to consult , in the end , most policies require an agent as the middle person , anyway . Starting out by calling an honest agent can make the process very simple and help you save hundreds of dollars .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
There are different schools of thought on how long you need life insurance . Some believe that you only need life insurance until you save up enough so that your dependents would do OK , even if your died prematurely . That philosophy is often called , `` buy Term , invest the rest . '' Those who like this idea tend to buy shorter terms and pay as little as possible for their life insurance , with the hopes that by the time their Term policy ends , they will not need to buy more . Some choose the age of retirement as their cutoff point for owning life insurance , with the intention of having all debts paid off and money for retirement saved up by then . On the opposite side of the fence are those who would use life insurance for a lot of their supplemental income and security in later life , and thus only buy permanent policies . Not only do they spend more on premiums than those who buy Term only , but they may even increase their premiums so that their policies are paid up by the time they retire . Many people fall somewhere in between . They buy what is most cost effective for each particular need . E.g. . They may buy Term for the bigger expenses in their lives , such as getting their kids raised . And they might buy a smaller Whole or Universal Life policy for their final expense needs . Then try to diversify their investments as is prudent at each stage of their lives , and in accordance with the economy , and products offered at that time .
Yes , more than likely you can , just like you can buy many insurance products on line . There are certainly arguments to be made for buying insurance that way and many major companies are including a `` direct line '' purchase option along with the more traditional distribution of products through a local licensed agency force . I know I myself am a licensed Professional Insurance adviser so I am biased , but it seems to me that we need to focus on what exactly we are buying when we make an insurance purchase . Sure , a policy is a document and a price is charged for what it represents , but i am convinced that most of us buy these things expecting that we 'll never have to use them , Hence the natural inclination to buy the cheapest . My opinion is that there are reasons to start your search on line , but talk to your local Insurance Professional for sound advice before buying anything .
Where is the best place to buy life insurance ? In Washington state it would be my office of course ! ;-RRB- Actually the best place to buy life insurance can vary . It could be online , on the phone or at an office . What you 're looking for is a agent who can answer your questions in such a way that you understand it . The agents role is not to speak to you in such a way that you are left scratching your head later over what was said . Big words , fancy charts do not make a good agent . A good agent translates the information you want into a way you understand , a poor one speaks over your head and bluffs their way through . I knew of an agent who used to produce a boiler plate document that was about two pounds of paper , of which two pages were actually about the client . The rest was fluff . He made a lot of sales that way because the clients were impressed by the volume presented , not the quality of information . The best place to buy is the place that actually answers your questions in a way that you understand and reduces the background noise as best as possible .
The word `` best '' is so subjective . Best what ? Best rates ? Best underwriting ? Best customer service ? Best claims payment history ? When you look at Insurance , compare it to purchasing an automobile . You have Mercedes , BMW , Toyota , Ford , Chrysler , Volvo . Which car is best ? Thats hard to say . Each of these makers produce cars that will start and take you to your destination . They can come with a lot of the things that make our car ride enjoyable . But what do you want ? Comfort ? Style ? Good gas mileage ? Ability to be driven for years ? High mileage capability ? It all depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay to get it . Insurance is the same way . Talk to an agent and clearly define what you want . Then look for companies that offer that product . Then you can compare prices , look into how they handle claims , customer service , etc. . Finally , realize that most Insurance companies -LRB- due to heavy regulations -RRB- have to meet certain standards to remain an Insurance company . That being said you can usually find a good fit for your circumstances if you do your research .
Nope . Life insurance can not be an investment . Think about this question for a second . What is the most essential element in an investment ? It is time . Some investments need time to mature . Other investments need time to increase in value . Example : if you are invested in the stock market , and your investment decreases in value , what should you do ? Should you sell ? Of course not . You would sustain the loss only if you redeem the shares at a lower price than when you bought them . What you should do is let them ride , and if properly managed , they should recoup their value , and then some . Over time . If you die , then you could pass this investment on to a family member , and that person could continue to manage the fund . It could continue to grow in value . Over time , during his or her lifetime . Does life insurance buy you this kind of time ? Absolutely not . The product is designed in just the opposite way . It assumes you will run out of time tomorrow . You get the biggest bang for the buck when a death benefit is paid immediately . Somebody could conceivably buy a policy today , pay one monthly premium , and then die . The beneficiary would receive the entire survivor benefit . Would you call something an investment if it required no time to realize value ? Nope . Or that is guaranteed to pay out , for that matter ? Lets talk about that guarantee for a second . Of all the forms of insurance you might buy , the only one you know for sure will pay a benefit is life insurance . This is because you know for sure you are going to die . You could buy medical insurance , but never get sick . You could buy disability insurance , but never get hurt . You could buy auto insurance , but never have a car accident . You could buy professional liability insurance , but never get sued . You could buy home insurance , but never have a fire . And on and on . However , if you hold on to that life insurance policy , you know your survivors will get paid . For sure . So , life insurance is a uniquely wonderful risk management tool that requires no time at all to realize value , and is absolutely guaranteed . With these characteristics , it meets nobodys definition of an investment . Now : I am sure you know that certain life insurance products can produce cash value . Whole life , universal life . Even term can carry a return of premium feature . But these funds are not to be considered investments . They should be seen as added value . As ways to partially offset your cost . As an extra benefit . They make the purchase of a policy extra attractive . But you should never assume that they will have time to grow . They will disappear as soon as a claim is filed and a benefit paid . And that could be tomorrow .
The best age to buy life insurance is the age that you need it . Did you get just married or have a child ? Your family will most likely need to have some sort of financial protection if your life would tragically be cut short . Did you buy a house ? Life insurance could pay off your mortgage if you passed . Do you need some funds to be easily accessible to your family to pay for your funeral ? You can buy life insurance for that , even if you are over 70 years old . Prices are lower while you are younger , but not enough people recognize their need for life insurance until they are older . The good news is , there are policies available at almost any age . So rather than think your best time has passed , go ahead and purchase life insurance if you need it . When you need it , now is the best time .
When to buy permanent life insurance ? That is a good question . Some agents recommend buying permanent life insurance for every policy . Some financial consultants recommend never buying permanent life insurance . Both have some valid justifications , but both are rather extreme positions . In real life , with budget limitations , health risks , bear markets , and other considerations , it is hard for me to recommend only one option . Not everyone can afford all the life insurance they need in permanent coverage . Yet buying only term presents the risk of being unable to qualify for a new policy when the current one expires . Putting money in the stock market and savings plans should cover final expense needs , eliminating the need for permanent life insurance . But will those investments and savings be there when you die ? My recommendations are to buy Term insurance for temporary needs , and Permanent insurance for lifelong needs . Specifically , permanent insurance is best for final expense needs such as funeral , burial , paying off credit cards , and other costs associated with putting the deceased to rest . Permanent insurance is recommended if you want to use the policy proceeds to pay estate taxes , pass money to heirs , or bequeath money to a charity . If you use term insurance for any purpose that may find you `` outliving the term '' , you may find that you no longer qualify for a new policy , and that all your plans for your life insurance are moot .
Interestingly enough , I am often asked the question , what is the best life insurance ? There is however , no overall best type that provides all solutions . What is best for you depends on your circumstances and what you want to accomplish . Universal life because of the flexibility is considered by many to be the `` best '' . Whole life and term products could also be the `` best '' , again depending on the circumstances and what you wanted to accomplish . An independent life insurance broker , representing several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There is no one policy that is the best for everyone as we each have our own needs and purposes for buying life insurance . Some may buy life insurance because they just got married , some because they have a new child , some for estate planning , and some for income replacement , just to name a few reasons why people buy it . In evaluating which is best for you , there 's a number of factors to consider such as what type of coverage do you want/need , the reason you want to buy it , how much coverage and for how long -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- , premium affordability , health status , where you live , and others . Term insurance is ideal for short term protection -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage or providing income in the event of an early or unexpected death -RRB- . Permanent insurance is ideal for long-term safety net protection , estate planning , retirement planning . Many people buy both types of coverage - some permanent to protect against the future after other debts are paid off and some term to cover time-limited debts -LRB- such as a mortgage , car , etc. -RRB- . Term insurance provides more bang-for-your-buck up front , but it 's only for a short period . Permanent insurance allows you to pay the same premium for the rest of your life without having to worry about it going up in the future . One of the first things you need to do is identify the risk classification you qualify for . The risk classification is critical because this determines what the premiums will be for the policy you 're applying for . This is where insurance brokers are essential in your pursuit of coverage . They have the knowledge to guide you through the process and help you find the policy that 's going to be most suitable for you .
Who sells the best whole life insurance ? Well in my many years as both a captive and independent I can answer truthfully , a lot of companies . The best thing about life insurance is that there are many companies that occupy that top of the table where best could apply to any of them . You may see from time to time , advertisements from companies showing they 're best for 250k coverage . What they put in small print would be male age 35 best possible class . Why ? because they may not be best for females age 30 standard plus class . The best place to be company wise will simply depend on who you are , how your health is , how much coverage you buy and do you smoke ? Your answers may make the best company be entirely different than somebody else like your spouse for example .
-- > Normal 0 The Best homeowners insurance policy is the one that is going to do what you want it to for what you are willing to pay . So what do you want it to do ? Pay for any damage to your home ? The Best policy would guaranty your home would be repaired or rebuilt if damaged by any cause . All policies will have exclusions or limitations . The Best policy will have the fewest exclusions or limitations . Reimburse you for loss or damage to your personal property ? The Best policy will repair or replace -LRB- new for old -RRB- your property should it be damaged from any cause . Again , most policies will have exclusions and limitations , the Best policy will have the fewest exclusions and limitations . The Best policy will include a Personal Liability limit not less than $ 300,000 and offer a good Personal Umbrella should you need or want higher limits . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will take the time to alert you to all the policy amendments available to address your specific needs . The Best policy will be offered by an agent or insurer who will stand with you should a claim occur and help you return to your pre-loss position . In my opinion , the Best policy will be the one that will do all the above for the most favorable premium .
There is no one policy that is the best for everyone as we each have our own needs and purposes for buying life insurance . Some may buy life insurance because they just got married , some because they have a new child , some for estate planning , and some for income replacement , just to name a few reasons why people buy it . In evaluating which is best for you , there 's a number of factors to consider such as what type of coverage do you want/need , the reason you want to buy it , how much coverage and for how long -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- , premium affordability , health status , where you live , and others . One of the first things you need to do is identify the risk classification you qualify for . The risk classification is critical because this determines what the premiums will be for the policy you 're applying for.This is where insurance brokers are essential in your pursuit of coverage . They have the knowledge to guide you through the process and help you find the policy that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you would like assistance or have any questions about life insurance , send me a private message . You can also visit my website , www.TermInsuranceBrokers.com , for input as well .
There is no one policy that is the best for everyone as we each have our own needs and purposes for buying life insurance . Some may buy life insurance because they just got married , some because they have a new child , some for estate planning , and some for income replacement , just to name a few reasons why people buy it . In evaluating which is best for you , there 's a number of factors to consider such as what type of coverage do you want/need , the reason you want to buy it , how much coverage and for how long -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- , premium affordability , health status , where you live , and others . One of the first things you need to do is identify the risk classification you qualify for . The risk classification is critical because this determines what the premiums will be for the policy you 're applying for . This is where insurance brokers are essential in your pursuit of coverage . They have the knowledge to guide you through the process and help you find the policy that 's going to be most suitable for you . If you would like assistance or have any questions about life insurance , send me a private message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is A Medicare Levy ?
If you are a senior with a high income -LRB- above $ 85,000 for those filing their tax return as single , above $ 170,000 for those married filing jointly -RRB- , you will pay a surcharge in addition to your standard Medicare Part B premium -LRB- $ 104.90 in 2014 -RRB- . The penalty you pay varies depending on your modified adjusted gross income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- from two years prior .
A Medicare levy surcharge is levied against taxpayers in Australia who do not take out private hospital insurance , and who earn above a certain income . The Medicare levy is intended to encourage Australian citizens to take our private cover and use the private system to lessen the burden on Medicare .
Medicare will assess a higher premium -LRB- surcharge or levy -RRB- in a couple of different situations . Medicare Part B premiums may carry a levy based on your income . Congress decided higher income people should pay more for their Medicare coverage . The surcharge varies and is based on your income tax return from 2 years prior . There is also a late enrollment penalty that may apply if you fail to enroll in Part B on a timely basis .
There are two , or possibly three , types of Medicare levy or surcharge that may apply . Medicare Part B will assess a surcharge on your Part B premium if your earnings exceed a threshold as determined by Congress . There is also a late enrollment penalty for Part B if you fail to sign up on a timely basis . A third kind of levy is on Part D if you do not sign up for D when you are first eligible .
A Medicare levy surcharge is a tax on Australians that earn over a certain amount and dont have private health insurance hospital cover . This surcharge provides health coverage for you and your dependents , including your spouse , any of your children who are under 21 years of age , or any of your student children who are under 25 years of age . T he surcharge is in addition to the Medicare Levy of 1.5 % , which is paid by most Australian taxpayers , and is calculated at the rate of 1 % to 1.5 % of your income .
Medicare Levy Exemption is an exemption granted to residents of Australia that prevents them from having to pay the Medicare levy if they are not eligible to receive Medicare . If an Australian is eligible to receive Medicare , they are bound to pay the Medicare Levy through their tax returns each year .
I believe the Medicare levy is a tax for citizens and legal residents of Australia , used to help provide access to healthcare . I do n't believe it can be avoided . In the United States , people pay Medicare taxes -LRB- also known as FICA taxes -RRB- during their working lives and get access to Medicare benefits when they turn 65 -LRB- or earlier for people on disability -RRB- . FICA taxes are typically deducted from a person 's paycheck and everyone is required to pay them .
You are exempt from Medicare levy in Australia when you are not eligible for Medicare at all , if you meet one of the medical conditions outlined by the Australian Taxation Office , or if you were a foreign resident or a resident of Norfolk Island for a full year -LRB- 365 days -RRB- .
There are 2 types of Medicare levy 's on the beneficiary that can apply . One is the LEP -LRB- late enrollment penalty -RRB- that applies if you fail to enroll in Medicare on a timely basis . The LEP is 10 % per year . The other is a penalty surcharge tax on high income earners earning over $ 85,000 or couples earning over $ 170,00
In 2000 the IRS started the Federal Payment Levy Program . Through this program the IRS collects overdue taxes by taking money from a variety of sources . The cost of Medicare is a tax and it appears that the IRS can take that money from other entitlements that you might receive . You do have some rights under this act which you should review . Additional information is available on the IRS website .
It will not be `` illegal '' not to have health insurance . However starting 2014 the federal government will start levying penalties on businesses that have over 50 full time equivilent employees and on individuals who do not have health insurance either through their spouse , work , individual coverage , or are listed as a covered dependent on someone else 's insurance policy .
Employers with 50 or more full time employees are required to provide a government approved plan for their workers . Smaller employers -LRB- fewer than 50 full time -RRB- are not required to offer health insurance and many may not . Failure to comply with the employer mandate will result in fines -LRB- taxes -RRB- levied on the employer .
Employers employing 50 or more full time equivalent employees -LRB- FTEs -RRB- must provide a qualified health plan for at least 95 % of those employees or a tax of $ 2000 per employee per year -LRB- after thirty employees -RRB- will be levied on that employer . The tax is not tax deductible . This is a complicated law and there are additional requirements to consider .
Beginning in 2014 the PPACA , better known as the Presidents signature legislation , Obamacare goes into effect . Obamacare is a mandatory health insurance regulation that every American is legally bound to purchase , if they qualify under income means testing . If they elect not to participate , then the IRA will levy a penalty which the Supreme Court defines as a tax .
Almost all permanent cash value life insurance policies accumulate cash values based on the performance of their crediting methods . But they also have surrender charges , usually from the first 9 years to 15 years of a policy . The cash surrender value accessible cash values after the charges have been levied against the account value . It can be punitive to surrender cash values and may have ordinary income tax ramifications .
The Internal Revenue Service under IRC Section 6331 has the authority to seize retirement accounts to satisfy federal taxes owed by plan participants in specific scenarios . In general terms , the IRS will mail Forms 668-W or Forms 668-A , which is a notice of levy , to the retirement plan administrator to seize assets . It is extremely important to engage a tax attorney or enrolled agent to represent your interests in a dispute with the Service .
That is a great question ! The answer is you really do n't want to . First , most States will require that the car be licensed and registered in the same State , and levy fines or license suspensions if they find it is n't . The insurance company will more often than not deny a claim , or even cancel your policy if they find that you misrepresented where the car was being used . All in all , it 's not a good idea . Thanks for asking , though !
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
If you live in a state where auto insurance is required in order to maintain registration , then in many cases , like here in Connecticut , the insurance company will notify your state 's Department Of Motor Vehicles -LRB- DMV -RRB- about the lapse . DMV will send you a letter for each of the cars on your policy asking that you show proof of continuous coverage from the date of the lapse . If you have not obtained coverage elsewhere , DMV will notify you that your registrations will be suspended and then also levy a fairly hefty fine .
Probably not . The requirement to have and maintain car insurance as a condition of registering your car for use on public roads and highways is established by state law , regulated and managed by your state 's Department of Motor Vehicles and enforced by local and State police authorities . If you cancel your car insurance and do not replace it , your DMV may levy a fine and or cancel your car 's registration , which then if you were pulled over may add to the violation charges against you .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How To Choose A Medigap Policy ?
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans -LRB- A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N -RRB- . Each have their own set of benefits . Plan F and Plan G are the most popular because they offer the most comprehensive health care coverage -LRB- with Plan F also offering a High Deductible Plan -RRB- . It 's best to work with an independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can explain the benefits of each standardized Medigap Plan and provide you premium information from many insurance companies -- not just the carriers you see online . When I work with Medicare Beneficiaries , they often determine which Medigap Plan they want based on benefits and premium cost . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
It can be overwhelming research Medigap on your own . The best way to choose a Medigap Plan is to work with an independent agent . Trying to navigate the internet is time consuming and actually limits your Medigap choices . However you wish to proceed , make sure you look at a comparison chart and Outline of Coverage for the 10 standardized Medigap Plans . They each have varying benefits . You 'll want to determine which benefits are important to you and which Medigap plan best fits your budget . The two most popular plans are Medigap Plan F and Plan G. Medigap Plan F will cover all the gaps in Medicare coverage . You do n't have to meet any deductibles , co-pays or co-insurance . Medigap Plan G acts just like Plan F -- after you 've met the small $ 147 annual Part B deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F . If you would like assistance in comparing plans and premiums , please contact me . My personalized service is always free .
In addition to what Jason stated , I 'd also like to point out that not all insurance companies offer Medigap Select plans . In fact , the insurance companies that offer Medigap Select Plans often are the major companies advertising online . Their premiums are usually high and to make the Medigap Plan more ` affordable ' , they offer the Medigap Select . One of the great benefits of having a Medigap Plan is your freedom to choose any Medicare provider without the boundaries of a network . Getting a Medigap Select Plan will limit your freedom . While you may be happy with your local in-network hospital , if you want to see a cardiologist in a neighboring state , you 'll be out of luck on a Select Plan . There are dozens of insurance companies that offer Medigap Plans at affordable prices . I 've never had to offer my clients a Medigap Select Plan F , G or N because I 've always found them an affordable Medigap Policy by taking the time to shop the Medicare Supplement market .
Let me start by saying that Medigap isnt the same as Part B but lets get a better understanding of how Medicare works . If you look at page 17 of the 2015 Medicare and You book you will see there are 2 main choices on how you can get your Medicare coverage . There is Original Medicare that includes Part A and B with the option to fill in the gaps in Original Medicare by buying a Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Or there is Medicare Advantage Plan , Part C , which include Part A , Part B and in most cases Part D. On page 92 of the Medicare and You book you will find that all Medigap policies are standardized . All polices offer that same basic benefits but different insurance companies may charge you different premiums for the same exact policy . Its a good idea to use a good broker that represents multi companies that can show you not only the price difference but also the average rate increases because all Medigap policies go up every year . Now there are different Medigap plans A-N , the easiest way to think about this is like car insurance . You can buy a car insurance policy with no deductible but by doing so your premium will be higher . If you choose to assume some of the risk , buying a policy with a deductible your premium will be lower . As long as youre in fairly good health -LRB- no major illnesses or recent hospitalization with in the last 2 years -RRB- you can show the market for the lowest price , remember Medigap plans always have a price increase each year and its always a wise decision to shop around every couple of years to find the best price . I am aware of one insurance company that once you are approved , will allow you to change between plans without re-looking at your current health , which may be a viable option if you want to save money with a higher deductible while you are in good health and then when your health starts to change you change your plan to a lower deductible . If you have any other question feel free to contact me for a phone review or we can chat on Skype .
The short answer is it depends . When you turn 65 and start your Medicare Part B you will get a 6 month window where you can choose any Medigap Insurance Plan you like . There will be no health questions and you can not be denied . After you turn 65 and are past the 6 month window of signing up for Medicare Part B then you can still get a Medigap Plan . With most carriers there will be 10-12 health questions that you will need to answer in order to get approved . Working with an independent agent that specializes in Medigap Insurance will help you to choose the insurance carrier that fits your health situation the best . Most of the health questions are centered around big and recent health issues . I would not be concerned with getting denied I would just contact an expert to help you through the process . Once you have a Medigap Insurance it is guaranteed renewable which means it can never be canceled on you as long as you pay the premiums . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
The best Medigap insurance can be found with the company that offers the lowest premium for the Plan you want . It 's really that simple . All Medigap Plans are standardized . This means each lettered plan has the same exact benefits from one insurance company to the next ... the only difference is the price . CMS has safety nets in place for Seniors , so if you have a Medigap Plan your bills are going to be paid according to the benefits of your Plan . If you have Medigap Plan F , all your Medicare approved charges will be covered and you do not have to pay any deductibles or coinsurance . Medigap Plan G works just like Plan F and covers all Medicare approved charges after you 've met the annual Part B deductible . With so many insurance companies available who sell Medigap insurance , it is wise to work with an independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . That way you can choose the best Medigap Plan that is right for you .
If you are looking for a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap -RRB- , there are a few ways to find a Plan . When looking for a Medicare Supplement policy , an independent insurance agent will be able to shop the market and show you what is available in your area . Independent agents are not employed by insurance companies . This means they contract with many insurance companies allowing them to find the lowest premiums available . Their flexibility also means they can help you locate an insurance company based on a health condition as well . You can contact the insurance carrier directly in some cases . While this may seem convenient , it is often more expensive and you wo n't have an agent to help you with annual rate reviews . Captive agents work for one insurance company and can only offer Medicare Supplement insurance products from that company . Premiums can vary . What 's important to note is that you do n't have any choices because the captive agent ca n't shop the Medicare insurance market for you . Researching on the internet is an option , but can be time consuming . Also keep in mind that most insurance companies do not make their premiums available to the public and will only work with a licensed insurance agent . If you are considering a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , you 'll want to make sure whoever you choose to work with will take the time to find out what plan will work well for you . Most people choose Plan F because it covers all Medicare approved bills and they do n't have to worry about deductibles , co-pays , co-insurance or excess charges . Lately , Plan G has been popular because it works just like Plan F after meeting the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F , making it more affordable for some . These are not the only Medigap Plans ... there are eight other Plans to choose from ... that is why it is wise to speak to an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance .
Yes , you can change from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . You must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to original Medicare . If you joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you first signed up for Medicare and are changing to Medigap within 12 months , you can choose from any Medigap policy . If you had a Medigap policy , switched to Medicare Advantage , and decided within 12 months to go back to Medigap , you can get your old policy back if it is still available . However , it will no longer have the prescription drug coverage . You may be able to get that from Medicare Part D.
How does long term disability insurance work ? Well you get to choose how long before it starts and how long it runs along with features that take effect when the policy is used . All of these aspect effect your cost . Actually long term disability is a very easy product to choose from as you can get a grid of waiting period and payout period on a spreadsheet to help put your policy together . You can choose when the policy starts , when it ends and if it grows with inflation or allows for partial disability and payments .
Medigap insurance are health plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in your Original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- coverage . Original Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . While 20 % may not seem like a lot , it can add up to substantial medical bills very quickly . The big advantage of Medigap plans are that they can help you create a very predictable healthcare expense structure which is extremely beneficial for those on a fixed income . There are 10 different plans to choose from and each Medigap plan features a different combination of benefits , however , they are all standardized -LRB- meaning the benefits are the exact same under a given Medigap plan regardless of which company you buy it from -RRB- . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It can be a bit confusing , but Medigap plans are utilized for persons that are covered under traditional Medicare . You can buy a policy from an insurance company such as Blue Cross , Humana or UnitedHealthcare -LRB- although there are plenty of other insurers to choose from -RRB- . It is designed to provide coverage for many of the out-of-pocket costs -LRB- such as Part A deductible and Part B costs -RRB- that are not picked up by Medicare . The different Medigap plans are standardized which makes it easy to compare , although there are differences in benefits . Medicare Advantage is a private health plan that is offered as an alternative to the more-traditional Medicare coverage . Often an HMO or PPO , you may see additional benefits included . Many of these plans include some form of prescription/drug benefit . Of course , you can not purchase BOTH a Medigap and Medicare Advantage plan . You can choose one , or simply not use a supplemental policy . An independent broker and/or a reputable website is a great place to view options from multiple companies . You can often instantly compare plans and easily apply online .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable ! The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable!The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
One of the best ways to compare Medigap Plans is to look at the benefits side-by-side . Medigap Plans are standardized , so all the lettered plans have the exact same benefits with every insurance company . Choosing to work with an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance is a step in the right direction . The right agent will take the time to show you the different Medigap Plans and describe the pros and cons based on your individual needs . Here are some questions that you may want to ask yourself : Do you want to pay the annual Part B deductible ? -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Do you want to pay any co-pays or co-insurance ? Do you want all the Medicare approved charges covered so you do n't have to deal with deductibles , co-pays and co-insurance ? As I stated above , Medigap Plans are standardized -LRB- Plan G with ABC insurance company has the same exact benefits with XYZ insurance company -RRB- and the only difference is the price . Once you decide which benefits you want , your agent can shop the market for the best premium . But do n't let that be the end of the story . You will want to make sure the insurance agent helping you with this process is one that provides on-going service and annual rate reviews . Far too many times do I speak with Seniors who signed up for a Medigap plan with a great premium only to have it sky rocket years later ... never once did the original agent check in with them . Thank you for taking the time to read my response . If I can help you compare Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me 1-888-411-1329 or visit my website at www.remedigap.com .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
The cost of Medigap policies can vary widely . There can be big differences in premiums that insurance companies charge for exactly the same coverage . As you shop for a Medigap policy , be sure you are comparing the same Medigap policy -LRB- for example , compare a Plan A from one company with Plan A from another company -RRB- . Each insurance company sets its own premiums . It is important to ask how an insurance company prices Medigap policies . How they set the price affects how much you pay now and in the future .
If you have Medicare Parts A and B , and have elected not to get a Medicare Advantage Plan , it is a good idea to buy Medigap insurance . Although Medicare is very good health insurance , Medicare does not cover 100 % of all health care costs for beneficiaries . You can check whether an item or procedure is covered by Medicare insurance at Medicare.gov . Medicare coverage is subject to deductibles and coinsurance amounts that may possibly be substantial to you . Medigap insurance is designed to pay for deductibles and coinsurance on your behalf in exchange for a predictable monthly premium payment . You have 11 standardized Medigap plans to choose from with various coverage options to meet your budget . I advise finding a licensed insurance agent who is experienced in Medigap plans to assess your needs and objectives and review optimal solutions with you .
The best time to buy a Medigap policy is when you are first eligible , i.e. during your 6-month Medigap open enrollment period , because you can buy any Medigap policy sold in your state , even if you have health problems . This period automatically starts the month you 're 65 and enrolled in Medicare Part B , and once it 's over , you ca n't get it again . Medigap insurance companies are generally allowed to use medical underwriting to decide whether to accept your application and how much to charge you for the Medigap policy . However , if you apply during your Medigap open enrollment period , you can buy any Medigap policy the company sells , even if you have health problems , for the same price as people with good health .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Self Storage ?
Ten percent of your policy value is available for coverage of items that you own that are not directly on your property up to the limits designated by the policy less your deductible . If you have a 20,000 policy , you would have up to 2,000 of coverage available for your personal items not stored on your property . Please remember every policy and carrier is different . Read your policy completely to know what coverage is provided and what exclusions there may be .
I am not aware of any renters policy that would exclude a storage unit . A storage unit is considered your premises so coverage is extended to your items in the unit up to the limit of coverage 's you chose when you purchased the policy . Now if you store items at a friends , neighbors or relatives residence past 30 days coverage will be reduced to 10 % .
Homeowners Insurance policies generally provide Personal Property Coverage . There is usually a stipulation on the Personal Property section of coverage stating that 10 % of the limit may be claimed for personal property away from home . Thus , you may have personal property coverage while placed in storage units . It is important to review your homeowners insurance prior to placing personal property in storage units . Also , if you are renting storage units from a well known company , many do have an additional insurance agreement that can be purchased to provide coverage .
I would agree most tenant-homeowners policies cover your personal property while it 's in your home or `` anywhere else in the world '' and there is no limitation I 'm aware of for storing some of that property in a storage unit . Although I do n't wish to disagree with a colleague , I believe coverage would apply at another residence should you have more than one but a 10 % or $ 1000 , whichever is greater , limitation would apply . Tenants policies generally limit coverage to specific named perils like fire , wind , theft . certain types of water damage , etc. , but your personal property should be covered in a storage unit the same it would if the property was in your home . Dropping ink on a rug however may not be one of the covered perils .
If the personal property stored in a storage unit is an emergency removal from the insured residence , it is fully covered for thirty days . If it is merely storage of excess items the coverage is limited to ten percent of the personal property limit stated in the policy .
It should . There are typically exclusions or limitations to certain items , so always check with your agent -LRB- if you 're luckyenoughto have one -RRB- . You mustprovethe loss and the amount and you cannotreceivemore than the policy limits or the per item limits . Property coverage on your renters insurance policy will also cover items in a garage or storage unit or while traveling .
Absolutely . Renters Insurance is often extended to things like storage units , automobiles , property in your luggage while you are on a trip . Many people are unaware of this and therefore usually end up with a loss not knowing that they could file a claim . Please contact me for more information
If the tenants policy is in force , personal property is covered anywhere in the world . This does n't apply if it is located in another residence . For example you loan a carpet to your mother who then drops a bottle of ink on the carpet , in her home , coverage would be denied . If it were in a storage unit and suffered similardamage it would be covered .
Loss of Use for both Renters and Homeowners Insurance pays for any additional expenses incurred if you are forced to leave your home or apartment while repairs are being made . For example , you have to pay additional housing costs because of staying in a motel , you have to eat out more because you have no place to cook your food , you have to store your salvagable furniture in a storage facility . These type of things would be included under Loss of Use .
If I am reading your post correctly you had a water loss that damaged some of your items . The ones that were not destroyed were also not repaired and just restored in another unit . If this is the case the potential damage in question is from the first claim and not the second and I would suspect that your claim would be denied.If you can show youritems were fully repaired then the second loss is a second event and they may be coverage ifyour policy provides . Water damage from forced wind and storm is a covered peril unless excluded in your area but mold , if covered will have a specific sub limit . I would recommend you find a better storage facility that does not leak .
Auto insurance will not cover a boat . In order to properly cover or insure your boat you would need boat insurance . However in most cases your auto insurance liability will extend to the boat and trailer while they are attached to yourvehicle The boat and trailer will not be covered for physical damage but should you be backing up the boat for example and hit an object or person there would be coverage for the other party from a liability standpoint . Talk to your local agent about protecting yourself when you have your boat in the water or in storage with boat insurance .
Comprehensive coverage is not widely understood . Basically it covers damage to a vehicle that comes from something other than a collision . This includes striking an animal . The coverage is tied to the value of the car but some drop the coverage because they are putting the car in storage for a period of time . Any loss sustained would not be covered if comprehensive coverage was not maintained , whether that was a car being burned in a garage fire or vandalism .
It is not `` needed '' unless a lender gave you money to buy the house - then it definitely is needed . But even if your home was paid for , if you had a dog -LRB- dog bites -RRB- , have a pool -LRB- slip and falls -RRB- or entertain at home - then you 'd want one to protect you from liability claims of other 's . Plus , not only are your personal belongings covered at home , they are covered when traveling , in your car , at a hotel , on vacation or at a storage place . So it is really a smart consumer idea to keep a homeowner policy in place .
Most tenant-homeowners policies , I 'm not sure about Nationwide 's , cover your personal property while it 's in your rented apartment or `` anywhere else in the world '' . This type of policy usually limits coverage to specific named perils like fire , wind , theft . certain types of water damage , etc. , but it should cover your personal property while in storage the same as it would if your property was in your home . Of course you will have to read the actual policy to make sure it provides the coverage you are looking for but coverage should not be hard to find .
The term ` Dwelling Extension ' in a homeowner policy is also commonly expressed as ` Other Structures ' . The amount of property insurance listed under Coverage B on your policy is usually 10 % of the amount of insurance you have chosen for the main structure - Coverage A . The Dwelling Extension or Other Structures feature covers all structures that are are either attached to your home , as with a connected garage or otherwise situated on the property , such as separate storage shed , gazebo , etc. . The 10 % can be increased based upon your needs .
This can be a little confusing as property stored offpremisesover 30 days is reduced to 10 % of it 's limit . However thisrefersto storing at such places like a parents or neighbors house for example . A storage unit is a different matter . Since you signing into a contract to rent a unit the unit is considered anextensionof your home and your items are fully covered . I strongly suggest you consult with your agent on the specifics of your particular policy as all polices are notnecessarilycreated equal .
It may , at least in part , cover this . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy . Policies can provide for coverage so long as the tree has fallen and caused damage to real property , for example , your house or storage shed . In cases such as this , the policy would pay to remove the tree andrepair the damage to the affected property and for the cutting up and removal of the debris . This would however all be subject to your Homeowners ' deductible and the coverage provided may be limited to a specific dollar amount .
Everything the guys said above is spot on ... . Check to make sure you have all your discounts . Also , ask about coverage you do n't need . Most home policies have coverage for `` other structures '' . This could be a detached garage , storage building , or a car port . If you have ZERO unattached structures on your property , ask that to be zeroed out !!! It 's not a lot of savings ... yet I 've seen $ 20 - $ 200 a year saved . DO NOT try to save by reducing your liability coverage . If money is tight now , think of how bad it will be if you are raked over the coals by an ambulance chasing lawyer !! Last I want to address the my rate statement . Yes , that is the amount you are paying each month . Sadly , most customers -LRB- just shy of ALL -RRB- come to me with no real idea of how insurance works . Think of it as OUR insurance . You are in a pool with thousands of others . As people keep jumping in the pool and splashing water out , the water must be replaced . Well , its not water its money instead of water that needs to be replenished . So if your neighbor does a cannon ball of a claim , say a fire , A LOT has to be replaced . Yes , the neighbors rate radically goes up . Yet everyone in the pool is sharing the overall risk in an area . Your rate will go up dues to inflation and because the pool needs to be replenished . SOMETIMES there is just too much crud in the pool . YOU CAN look into joining a new group of insureds that are in a cleaner pool . SHOP AROUND . If you have a question , reach out ! - gravy
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
If you want to err on the side of caution keep your last seven years of insurance records at least . I would suggest scanning all of these documents into your computer as jpeg documents and then save them to cd or dvd storage so that you can keep a copy off site and they are easily opened on another computer .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Medicare Pay For Avonex ?
Yes , Medicare does pay for Avonex for treatment for Multiple Sclerosis . However , there is a copay , so expenses for Avonex can still be quite high for the insured person with MS. There are some prescription assistance programs that can be used to assist in paying for the copay associated with Avonex . See WEBSITELINK for more information .
Yes , Medicare does pay for Avonex for treatment for Multiple Sclerosis . However , there is a copay , so expenses for Avonex can still be quite high for the insured person with MS. There are some prescription assistance programs that can be used to assist in paying for the copay associated with Avonex . See WEBSITELINK for more information .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second .
If you only have Medicare A & B or Parts A & B plus a Medigap plan , Medicare is going to pay first . When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medigap plans C , D , F , G , M , and N will pay skilled nursing facility coinsurance , but only if Medicare will cover the stay . Medigap plans K and L pay a percentage of the coinsurance if Medicare will cover the stay . Medicare does cover some inpatient skilled nursing care , but only if 1 . its necessary to treat an improving medical condition AND 2 . services are provided at a Medicare approved facility AND 3 . the person spent at least 3 days as an admitted inpatient at a hospital . -LRB- Note : many Medicare beneficiaries that go to the hospital are coded for an observational stay , due to stricter governance by CMS over higher cost reimbursements for inpatient admissions . If a patient is coded for an observational stay , and not an inpatient admittance for at least 3 days , they are not eligible for the skilled nursing benefit . Over 1 million Medicare beneficiaries lost SNF benefit last year due to observation coding -RRB- . Medicare skilled nursing benefit : Medicare pays up to 100 days of skilled nursing facility -LRB- SNF -RRB- care if the qualifications are all met , days 1-20 in full , days 21-100 subject to $ 161 per day patient co-insurance -LRB- 2016 -RRB- . If a doctor places an individual in a hospital or skilled nursing facility when the kind of care the individual needs could be provided elsewhere -LRB- i.e. at home or a non-skilled care facility -RRB- , the individuals SNF stay will not be considered reasonable and necessary , and Medicare will not pay for it . If an individual stays in a hospital or skilled nursing facility longer than necessary , Medicare payments will end when inpatient care is no longer reasonable or necessary . Medicare also does not cover the stay if the patient needs only custodial care , i.e. assistance with activities of daily living .
Having two health insurance programs generally happens when a person is eligible/signed up for Medicare Part A -LRB- premium-free -RRB- , but is still working and has group health insurance coverage through their employer . When this happens and the group coverage pays first and Medicare pays second , the group coverage will pay its share and whatever the balance is will go through the Medicare 's claims department - Medicare will pay their share up to the Medicare-approved amount . You will be responsible for paying any remaining balance after that . Most of the time if you 're paying for Medicare Part B , you 're not going to be paying for group coverage as well - you would either have group coverage + Medicare Part A or Medicare Part A + Part B . If you 're on Medicare Parts A & B , I highly recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy to help cover the gaps in coverage provided by Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
Medicare Supplemental Plan F covers 100 % of what Medicare does n't cover . Keep in mind , when you have Supplemental -LRB- AKA Medigap -RRB- Plans , Medicare is your primary insurance provider . For medically necessary procedures , Medicare Parts A -LRB- Hospital -RRB- and B -LRB- Doctors -RRB- provides good coverage , but still leaves folks on Medicare with a lot of out of pocket exposure . The Plan F pays for everything that Medicare does n't pay . However , if Medicare determines that the medical procedure you received was n't medically necessary , they wo n't pay anything nor will the Supplement Plan -LRB- regardless of who you get your supplemental plan with -RRB- .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In short , Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . Excess charges falls under what a doctor can bill you for . If you read an outline of coverage of a plan F or a plan G -LRB- whichever carrier 's outline you want to look at does n't matter - the plans are standardized so the input is the same regardless of company -RRB- , you will see that Medicare Part A pays all but specified amounts during a hospital stay -LRB- as an inpatient -RRB- as follows : 1 -RRB- First 60 days - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 1,260 . Medigap plan F and G pay the deductible for you . 2 -RRB- Days 61-90 - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 315 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 315 a day for you -LRB- 30 days totals up to $ 9,450 -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Days 91 + -LRB- while using 60 lifetime reserve days -RRB- - Medicare Part A pays for all but $ 630 a day . Medigap plan F and G pay the $ 630 a day -LRB- 60 reserve days totals up to $ 37,800 -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Once lifetime reserve days are used , additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . Medigap plan F and G pay 100 % of Medicare-eligible expenses up to an additional 365 days . 5 -RRB- Beyond the additional 365 days - Medicare Part A pays $ 0 . * Note - that 's per benefit period ! A benefit period begins on the first day you receive services as an INPATIENT and ends after you 've been out of the hospital for at least 60 days in a row . It 's possible to have more than one benefit period in the span of a year . Inpatient stay coverage per benefit period includes semi-private room and board , general nursing , and miscellaneous services and supplies . Please also note , you can be in a hospital for a day or two and still be listed as an outpatient . If you 're unsure , you should ask your doctor if you 're listed as an inpatient or outpatient in their system . Unless you 're admitted as an inpatient , you 're being treated as an outpatient which is where your Medicare Part B coverage comes into play . Part B pays about 80 % of medical expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % -LRB- covered by plans F and G -RRB- . If a doctor accepts Medicare assignment , they accept the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full . If they do not accept Medicare assignment , they can bill you an excess charge - which are covered by plans F and G . If you live in Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , or Vermont , you can not be charged excess charges by a doctor due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure laws . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When you have more than one plan paying a claim , the process has to follow the coordination of benefits rules to determine who pays first and who pays second . The majority of the time , people who are on Medicare will have two types of coverage when they or their spouse works for an employer . Self-employed individuals will generally only be on Medicare and drop their under 65 policy -LRB- unless their spouse has group coverage they can be on -RRB- . How big the company is and whether or not the insured employee is working will generally determine who pays first . If the employer has 20 or more employees , the employer plan will pay first and Medicare second . If the employer has less than 20 employees , Medicare will pay first and the employer will pay second . If you 're on Medicare for a disability , the employer plan pays first and Medicare pays second if there are 100 or more employees - if there are less than 100 employees , Medicare pays first and the employer plan pays second . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medicare does cover Home Health Care , BUT only if : its ordered by a Medicare approved physician AND the person in incapable of leaving the home AND services are rendered by a Medicare approved provider AND the person requires more than just assistance with activities of daily living -LRB- eating , bathing , dressing , toileting , functional mobility -RRB- . Medicare will not pay for services performed by immediate relatives or members of a patients household . Medicare does not pay for Assisted Living or Adult Day Care . If these conditions are met , Medicare will generally cover medical services in the home as ordered by a Medicare approved physician .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Is Car Insurance Cheaper For Commute Or Pleasure ?
Depending on your carrier and your state laws but I have found that with some carriers the rate has no change . However as far as claims go With some carriers if you list it as commute only and then you are taking it for a pleasure drive and have an accident I have seen the carrier try to dispute the claim because it was listed as commute which means that was the only type of usethe auto was being used and then you used it for pleasure and they did n't want to play the claim because it was rated incorrectly . I would talk to you agent or carrier and ask them how they define commute . Most cases it is n't an issue but I would n't want to take the risk and have it rated commute when you using pleasure and have an issue when a claim arose
More commonly pleasure will get the lower rate but different insurance companies see this different ways according to the actuaries so with some pleasure is higher . There are other factors to take into consideration and that is how many people in the household . How many cars are there which also are rating factors .
Depending on your carrier and your state laws but I have found that with some carriers the rate has no change . However as far as claims go With some carriers if you list it as commute only and then you are taking it for a pleasure drive and have an accident I have seen the carrier try to dispute the claim because it was listed as commute which means that was the only type of usethe auto was being used and then you used it for pleasure and they did n't want to play the claim because it was rated incorrectly . I would talk to you agent or carrier and ask them how they define commute . Most cases it is n't an issue but I would n't want to take the risk and have it rated commute when you using pleasure and have an issue when a claim arose
There are many ways to get cheaper car insurance , so be sure to shop around . That may be something you do on your own or with the help of an independent agent who writes coverage for multiple companies and who therefore can shop for you . There are a multitude of variables that will produce savings way beyond the scope of this answer , but think about what car you buy , what driving record you have , what use you have of the vehicle -LRB- business , commute , pleasure -RRB- , discounts for safety programs such as Defensive Driving or Drivers Training etc. . My admonition is not to leap to a position of lower limits of coverage . Do everything else your insurance professional suggests before you take that extreme measure .
To be honest with you , I am not exactly sure how to answer your question . I will say that if you use your car for a delivery business , for example newspaper or pizza , odds are you will not have coverage under your car insurance policy . It is best to check with your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions as well as any limitations in your policy . Likewise , if you use your car for work , you may pay more than if it is just used for commuting or pleasure .
A little hard to say in a general sense , but this is a terrific question for your Insurance Professional . There are a number of details that are factored when developing the rate that you pay . You mentioned the year of your car as well as the type . A vehicle like yours can in some cases cost more on the liability portion f your policy due to it 's size and weight . Another factor is how you drive -LRB- pleasure or commute for example -RRB- and how many miles you drive . The state and area where you live can be a factor as well . The coverage options that you have chosen will also naturally drive premium . Ask to see if you are receiving all available discounts . If you insure your car and home with the same company , there can be some very nice premium savings discounts available .
What is business use auto insurance ? When you ask a company for a quote , they will ask you how you use your vehicle . the most common uses are : to work -LRB- commute to an office -RRB- and how far . Pleasure use -LRB- non-working drives to the store and such -RRB- . Business use -LRB- drives vehicle in the course of daily business , such as outside salesmen . -RRB- Generally the more frequently you are on the road the more a auto insurance carrier will charge for coverage .
How much is to buy a house in California ? This question ca n't be answered , unless more details are provided . In general , the full coverage cost depends on : Driver age Driver gender Driver marital status Driving record for the past 3 years Vehicle garaging zip code Vehicle use : pleasure / work-school commute Vehicle year/make/model Are there any other drivers in household ? Any other line of insurance with the same carrier -LRB- HO , Condo , Renters , Life , etc -RRB- Coverage limits Deductible The lowest full coverage policy I 've seen in California was $ 400/yr .
When you consider insurance as shared risk pool , the answer to this question comes into sharper focus . If there are two drivers in the same city with the same driving record driving automobiles that are both the same year make and model , who should pay more for their policy , the driver who will commute 30 miles day to work or the one who uses the car sparingly on weekends ? Mileage makes a difference . Every mile is a unit of exposure that makes one riskier than another . If one of our drivers trades in their sedan for a high powered , low weight sports car and the other driver is still driving the low powered four door sedan he had in the first example , who should pay more ? Assuming the same mileage , the high powered sports car presents two problems to the shared risk pool . The first problem is that with that power and low weight the driver is more apt to engage in aggressive and perhaps dangerous driving . The second is that the body of that low weight sports car is probably more expensive to repair . The anticipated use of the vehicle and the cost of repair are two items which shift the expense that the risk pool will experience . Now suppose that the first driver , the one with the sedan is 16 years old while the driver of the high powered sports car is 55 . Experience plays a major role and might reverse the experience making the sedan the riskier car to insure . Experience is very important in rating an automobile risk . Now suppose that this first driver also has a recent citation for driving under the influence of alcohol . The older driver has a spotless driving record . Certain violations are deemed more dangerous than others and a DUI is considered the worst . This blemish will follow this young driver for ten years in California and the price of insuring that driver will increase a great deal . DUI , and racing are two violations that have a tremendous impact on the cost that the risk presents . Now suppose that our older , more stable driver takes a job delivering pizzas for a neighborhood pizzeria . The driver now presents an entirely different type of risk because he is now doing commercial driving . The risk he presents is increased a great deal because he will not be as focused on driving as he will be looking for addresses and worrying that the pizzas might be getting cold . As you can see most drivers are unwilling to pay the same amount for insurance that a driver that is inexperienced , or driving an expensive fast car , or driving excessively , or using the car for commercial purposes or has a record of DUI . They want to share the expense of insurance with like drivers and that is exactly how the insurance company operates . The insurance company issues rates for standard drivers and then alters the rates to take into account the variations that exist . These rates and variations are based upon the companies experience with thousands of accidents . The assignment of rates is not a perfect science but it is as close as possible to reality . The amount an insurer charges for a risk is what they think it will cost them to include that car into their risk pool . Insurance companies are not designed to gouge the public . They are required by law to remain solvent so that they can pay claims and meet their promises . The price an individual driver pays needs to be considered from the perspective of all the other drivers who the company insures .
Car insurance is not based on your job it is based on the annual mileage and miles you drive to work . If you do not commute and drive less than 6000 miles per year , for example , your rates will be lower than a person who drives his car all day in business putting 40,000 miles per year on his car .
That is a great question ! What you do for a living can have an effect on the price of your auto insurance , especially if you use the vehicle in a business capacity . If you drive long distances in your car , the annual mileage is a determining factor in your rate , and can cause it to be higher than if you only drive a short commute . Certain occupations can increase your rate , if the car is insured as a work vehicle . Contact your agent for the specifics . Thanks for asking !
I can address this question specifically for Florida . The Florida Department of Motor Vehicles requires that you register your car within 10 days . That 's pretty fast and a lot of people find becoming a Florida resident to be a bit stressful . It is important to know that in order to register your car you have to have Florida insurance . Handle the insurance first and take that proof of coverage with you to register . If your insurance carrier writes auto in Florida , changing the policy can be as easy as a cancel/re-write . If you 're changing carriers , be prepared to answer all the necessary questions for your household ... Driver 's License , Date of Birth , SSN and the vehicle information ... VIN number . Your use of vehicle is also important . Many new Floridians are new retirees as well . Be sure to have the policy rated correctly ... as a retired person vs someone who commutes to a job . Depending on the county in Florida , a visit in person with the agent may be necessary to verify no prior damage to the vehicle . Related to this is the need to change your Driver 's License . Depending on what state you are moving from some additional documentation to prove your identity may be required . Be sure to check this out before making the trip to the DMV .
It does to a point . Each carrier uses different parameters to calculate your auto insurance premium . Almost all carreirs will ask a question or two about your driving habits . Some of the questions may be is your vehicle used primararyly for work or pleasure and approxiamate number of miles driven one way and possibly other quiestions .
Disability insurance is paid out on a tax free basis , for that reason it will pay you the `` net '' amount of your income that you are wishing to replace . Typically it is around 60 % to 70 % of your `` gross '' pay . Different companies will allow percentages between those amounts . Also you will not be needing commuting costs or other costs related to working .
It may . Be employed or unemployed is typically not a factor that is used in determination of your auto insurance premiums . Your rate could be effected because your driving would be modified from driving to work to pleasure driving . Depending on how this used in the equation that generates your rate . You could potentially experience a rate decrease or even an increase .
In almost all cases your personal auto insurance will not cover you if you rent a U haul truck . The U Haul truck will fall out of the bounds of personal auto used for pleasure and also the weight category put the vehicle is the commercial range which is 10,000 lbs or higher . I highly recommend you discuss this with your current insurance company for clarity on your particular policy .
It can be hard to sell life insurance as a profession because it is an expense for which many people feel that they do not `` have '' to budget . When money gets tight , it is easier to give up life insurance than it is to give up something that brings them comfort or pleasure while alive . Thinking about death is also not pleasant for most people , and talking about it , even less so . Life insurance agents must have a mixture of business sense with personal empathy to be successful , do good for their clients , and be fulfilled .
The vision of boat varies dependent upon the person . For some a boat is a two person canoe and for others it is a 100 ft. yacht . Most homeowners policies provide coverage for a small pleasure boat . They generally exclude boats that have more than a specified amount of horse power . They will also restrict boats based upon their length . If you have a rowboat , call your agent and get a specific answer . If you have a ski boat call your agent for a quote on boat insurance .
You can take a defensive driving course and get a discount on your auto . It can vary based on what state you live in . You can take a look at your deductibles as well . You may have a very low deductible and not even realize it . You should make sure how much you use your vehicle is how it is listed on the policy . Many insurance companies choose rate based on how long you commute to work and / or how many miles you drive the vehicle per year . That can change throughout the years so make sure that is up to date on your policy
More commonly pleasure will get the lower rate but different insurance companies see this different ways according to the actuaries so with some pleasure is higher . There are other factors to take into consideration and that is how many people in the household . How many cars are there which also are rating factors .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can One Person Have Multiple Life Insurance Policies ?
A person can own as many Life Insurance policies as they desire if they qualify for the coverage and can pay for them . The biggest problem is that without proper counseling the policy may not fit the need that the person was purchasing the policy for . Many policies are put on the market to meet specific needs and because of the public knowledge a person may buy a policy that they thought meant one type of coverage when in actuality it was completely different coverage . Over my lifetime I have worked with persons who would buy term policies when in their mind they had mixed them up with policies which are paid up early , ie , ten pay life , etc. . I have met more than one individual who through the years had bought 10 year term thinking it was like ten pay life and that it would be paid up in ten years . I want to stress here that buying a Life Insurance policy without understanding all of its reasons for existence is like buying any auto with four wheels without knowing anything further . I would also like to point out that most Life Insurance policies have what is called a `` policy fee '' that is attached to the premium of the policy . What this means is that the company is charging fifty to sixty dollars per year for the administration of that policy and there is no coverage on that amount of the premium . I have had people want several smaller policies to avoid taking a medical . This also can be a mistake since most companies have discounts on the larger amounts of Life Insurance on an individual . In today 's life you can find an individual who has knowledge in all fields of finance . If that person is living up to the pledges made to become an agent they will educate the client and help them purchase the proper Life Insurance and investments without sales pressure . A good agent builds clients for a lifetime ! Allen D. `` Al '' Mitchell , Ph.D. , CLU , FLMI Author `` The Prophets Dollar '' second edition .
Yes , one person can have multiple policies . The type of policy that works best for one need may not be best for another . And some people simply like to spread their coverage around to different companies , just as they like to diversify their financial portfolio . You must be financially qualified for the sum of life insurance that you own , or for which you are insured . That is why life insurance applications will ask if you have other policies , and if you are replacing any of them . The amount for which you are financially qualified is based on your age , income , assets , and in rare situations , health factors .
Yes , with a proviso . You can have multiple life insurance policies , but only up to the face value combined limit of what would be reasonable , based on your income and situation . For example , if you earn $ 50,000 a year , and want a $ 5 million policy combined limit -LRB- say 5 policies of 1 million each -RRB- , that would not be permitted . The reason is that it would be too tempting for someone to due this , then wait two years , and commit suicide , to provide large amounts of money to their family . That is not the purpose of life insurance . It is meant to REPLACE lost income . Not to be a lottery . So , within reason , you could say buy five or perhaps even ten times your annual income . But do not expect to buy one hundred times it , in combined policies . And realize that by splitting up the policies , you gain nothing , since all policies will be viewable to all companies from a national listing they review . Thank you and love to help . GARY LANE , garylane@cox.net, 7144229616 .
The answer here is a resounding YES ! When you go through the process of examining your situation and determining how much life insurance you need , many people can not , or are n't willing to , pay for it all . In these cases , I recommend assigning a priority to each risk , and covering the most important first . As you can afford it , you can purchase additional policies at later dates . Timing is also a factor . Some risks are temporary while others are permanent . For example , a mortgage or college education for your children have an expiration date while your income or living expenses do not . For many of my clients , we will buy term insurance to cover the temporary risks and permanent insurance to cover the permanent risks . Insurance companies , for the most part , are n't concerned with how many different policies you have , they 're concerned about the total amount of coverage you have among all the policies . If money was not an issue I would recommend all permanent insurance as it 's the least expensive in the long run . However , many people can not afford to do this and end up purchasing both permanent and term insurance as their budget allows . The most important thing is to purchase the right amount first , even if it 's all term insurance . Once you lock in your insurability you can always convert that term to permanent as your budget allows . As always , find an advisor you can trust and listen to their advice . We deal with this every day and have specialists at our home offices for more complicated issues . We can usually find the right coverage at a price you can afford .
Yes , it is okay to have multiple life insurance policies . Insurance companies when they underwrite policies look at the amount of insurance in force , not the number of policies . Depending on your individual circumstances it may or may make sense , though.It is probably more out of pocket for you to have multiple policies . Since you would be paying multiple the policy fees and missing out on possible volume discounts . Since individual circumstances are different , I suggest you contact an independent insurance professional for advice . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Geico only writes personal auto insurance . They do not write homeowners insurance . This can be a competitive disadvantage to Geico because many insurers offer multiple policy discounts . What this means for you , the consumer , is you get a discount on your premiums if you have your auto and home insurance with the same company . To offset this competitive advantage , Geico has arranged partnerships around the country with insurers that specialize in homeowners insurance . This partnership gives Geico the ability to match the multiple policy discounts other insurance companies offer . Their partnerships are with different companies around the country . So to find out which insurer is partnered with Geico , you need to contact Geico dirrectly . Why do insurance companies do this ? For several reasons . It is cheaper for an insurance company to service multiple policies with the same customer than one policy . So they pass on the savings in overhead to the customer . Sometimes the insurance company uses the two policies to subsidize each other . So if you have an accident with your car , the premium the insurer gets from your home insurance can sometimes subsidize the bad loss experience on the auto policy , and vice-versa .
In most cases , you can have multiple disability policies . However , it may not make much sense depending upon the reimbursement terms of each respective policy . Most disability policies have limits on the payment amount which is most often determined by a percentage of current salary . If you have multiple policies , you will need to reveal this to each , at the time of policy purchase and/or at the time of claim submission . Multiple disability policies often occur when an employee receives a disability policy from his or her employer but wants to supplement the amount of income reimbursement , in the event of an income loss due to a disability . Often , but not always , payment from one policy will be off-set by the amount of payment from an additional disability policy , so that the policyholder does not receive more than the actual amount of income loss . Read each policy carefully , particularly as each addresses payment provisions .
You can have multiple homes and a separate policy for each home ; or , you can have one home and a separate policy covering distinct lines of risk . The first answer is self evident . The second answer needs a bit of clarification . The basic principal of indemnity means that you will be restored to your original position before the accident . This means you are not supposed to profit from an accident when an insurance company indemnifies you . So , you will not be able to profit by having multiple policies on one home for the same coverage . This type of fraud is specifically dealt with in the terms of the policy . However , you could theoretically get physical damage coverage through Insurance Company A and liability/medical payment protection through Insurance Coverage B . This would create a multiple policy coverage for one home . I hope this helps .
The number of life insurance policies is n't a concern except for the fact that consolidation of multiple policies can generally save you money . The real concern is why multiple policies ? One life insurance policy could cover the domestic financial liabilities , another to fund tax advantaged retirement income and still another could be for estate planning purposes . So you can have multiple polices for legitimate reasons .
Underwriters have a number of ways of answering this question . It all depends on why you want to buy the policy . If you want to replace your income , then they use a table to determine a multiple of your income . For example , depending on the company , a person in their 20s or 30s may end up with 20 or 30 times their annual income as a face amount limit . If you want to cover a personal debt such as a mortgage , or a business debt such as a bank loan , then you simply have to prove the amount due . If you need to meet the terms of a legal contract , such as a partnership agreement or divorce decree , then you have to document those terms . If you use life insurance to cover an estate tax obligation , then you need a financial statement proving your net worth . And you know what ? You could use a policy for multiple needs , or buy multiple policies with each one covering a different need .
Yes you can so long as the total death benefit amount makes financial sense to the insurers . Unlike car insurance for example where it is not an acceptable practice to have multiple policies providing coverage on your car , having multiple life insurance policies on yourself is not as a rule frowned upon . It would be a good idea , however , to talk to your Insurance Professional about this because each issued policy will have certain fixed fees included in your premium . Having several policies then might actually end up costing you more than having one larger policy for the full amount of the benefit .
Yes , you can have two or more term life insurance policies as long as you financially qualify for the total face amount . In a lot of cases it is more cost effective to own multiple polices based on the financial needs of your loved ones . For example , you may want a whole life for a small amount for your life time , a 30 year term life policy to cover your mortgage and a 20 year term life to cover the children 's education fund in case of your early death . By using multiple policies you will save monthly premiums rather than paying for one policy and having to reapply every few years .
split limits refers to the liability part of your auto insurance policy . liability coverage can be done one of two ways : split limit or combined single limit . example of a split limit : 100/300/100 if you were at fault in an accident : - the first number is the total amount in 1000 's that your company will pay per accident to an injured person that you hit . it is the most it will pay any single person for their injuries . - the second number comes in when you injure multiple people . it is the most the policy will pay per accident total for multiple injured persons . - the third number refers to the maximum in 1000 's that your policy will pay for property that you damaged .
I can only speak for the state of Michigan . In Michigan it is illegal to have duplicate insurance on one car . You can have different cars on different policies with different companies -LRB- usually not beneficial -RRB- . You can also add multiple drivers to multiple policies but not vehicles . Hope this helps !
Yes , most people can get life insurance while having Multiple Sclerosis . As you know , there is such a wide range of symptoms , from virtually having no impairments , to having to be confined to bed . So the type of life insurance you can get with MS depends on your own situation . If you have relapsing remitting MS and are still able to work full time , you should be able to get a medically underwritten policy at a reasonable price . If you are at the other extreme of needing assistance with ADL 's , you can get guaranteed issue life insurance if you fit those age guidelines . It is important to use a life insurance agent that understands multiple sclerosis underwriting , and carries a wide range of products , to get your most affordable MS life insurance .
United of Omaha is one of the biggest carriers in the life insurance industry and is an A + rated carrier by A.M. Best . Their life insurance rates can be competitive with many options . Often , some carriers have much better rates for certain types of coverage than other types -LRB- e.g. a carrier may be more competitive in the term insurance market than they are in the permanent insurance market , and vice versa -RRB- . Please note , when comparing life insurance companies , there are a number of factors you need to consider in addition to the financial rating of a life insurance company . Just because they may be a big name company , does not mean they 're going to be the best carrier for your needs . The most important factor you need to consider when looking at life insurance is the risk classification you qualify for . The risk classification determines the premiums for the program . It 's important to shop the case BEFORE applying for any coverage so you know which carrier will work best for your specific medical history , which will in turn point you in the best starting position . You ideally want to only have to go through the underwriting process once , not multiple times . If you try to apply to multiple carriers at the same time , it often works against you as it acts like a red flag to carriers and more questions get asked . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can help you determine what coverage structure is most suitable to your needs and budget , review and compare multiple options for you to make sure you 're getting the lowest rates for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , you can have multiple term policies . In fact , sometimes we will use multiple term polices in a clients strategy . For example , Let 's say you want $ 500k while the children are living at home . And after they move out , you only want $ 300k for about 20 years after . So if your kids move out in say 10 years , you might get a 10 year term policy for $ 200k and a 30 year term policy for $ 300k . This gives you $ 500k while the kids are home and then drops to $ 300k for an additional 20 years after they are out . And remember , there is a policy fee which you pay , which is built into the premium . Some companies will way multiple fees when you use a strategy like this , or as it is referred to sometimes , a layering strategy . If you would like to see any example of this might look like for you , feel free to reach out to me .
Most people can get life insurance if they have MS -LRB- Multiple Sclerosis -RRB- . Relapsing remitting MS with stable treatment over one year , no exacerbations for over a year , and few effects from the disease -LRB- able to work full time -RRB- will enable you to get the most affordable MS life insurance , possibly rated as good as Standard to Table 3 . If you have one of the types of Progressive Multiple Sclerosis , are in a wheelchair or unable to do your own ADL 's -LRB- Activities of Daily Living such as bathing or eating without the assistance of another person -RRB- , you will usually need to go with guaranteed issue life insurance . There are also a number of plans for persons with all types and severity of MS. Contact a good impaired risk agent who specializes in this type of coverage to cover the bases accurately and find your best rate .
Traditionally , you can get up to 20-30x your income level of life insurance . The medical history does not necessarily limit how much you can get . The medical history determines the risk classification which controls the premiums for the coverage you want to put in place . When it comes to breast cancer , the details of the medical condition will determine which carriers will offer coverage and what the risk classification would be -LRB- each carrier has different underwriting , you may not get the same risk class offer from each of them -RRB- , The best thing to do is to shop the case via an independent insurance agent/broker who can shop it to multiple companies . You do NOT want to apply to multiple companies as this can work against you due to the MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- - from a company 's point of view , it 's sort of like a red flag if you will if they saw you applied to multiple companies which they can check the MIB for . In order to secure the most accurate quotes for the coverage , a number of factors would need to be known such as when the cancer was diagnosed , what stage is it in/was it in , how was it treated , has treatment been completed , are there anymore tests scheduled or that need to be completed , are you being treated for any other conditions , what prescriptions do you take , family medical history , and other factors . If you have a copy of the pathology report , that will help with a lot of the input . If cancer is current , guaranteed-issue whole life -LRB- GIWL -RRB- will be the only type of coverage available as it does n't have any medical questions or exam requirements . However , the amount of coverage available under a single policy is $ 20,000 - $ 25,000 , depending on the carrier . To get more than that , you would need to stack multiple policies . Under GIWL policies , they traditionally feature a 2 or 3 year graded period - meaning you only have accidental death coverage during those periods , otherwise the carrier just returns the premiums paid into the policy if death occurs during the graded period . After the graded period expires , the full benefit is payable . Carriers typically only issue fully-underwritten coverage if the cancer has been in remission/treatment completed for at least 2 years . Many carriers prefer 5 + years from the date treatment was completed for a more favorable risk class . Send me a message via the `` contact me '' button by my profile picture if you would like me to assist with your coverage . My group is licensed with about 50 different carriers in numerous states . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know how I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
The best way to get multiple insurance quotes is to contact a local independent agent . Independent agents are not beholden to any once company and therefor are able to quickly give you multiple quotes with multiple options to chose from . Independent agents work for the client , not the insurance company .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is Permanent Disability Insurance ?
Permanent Disability Insurance could be Long Term Disability Insurance that is set up with a benefit to age 65 . Therefore , if a permanent disability is suffered , the policy will pay the benefit until retirement age . In Australia , Total and Permanent Disability -LRB- TPD -RRB- insurance is a policy that would pay a lump sum if the insured person suffered total and permanent disability .
Permanent Disability Insurance could be Long Term Disability Insurance that is set up with a benefit to age 65 . Therefore , if a permanent disability is suffered , the policy will pay the benefit until retirement age . In Australia , Total and Permanent Disability -LRB- TPD -RRB- insurance is a policy that would pay a lump sum if the insured person suffered total and permanent disability .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
Every insurance company has different criteria for their Disability policies . So you would need to review the fine print of each policy to see what causes of disability , or what levels of disability , each policy excludes . Some things that different Disability insurance policies might not cover , or might limit coverage for , are disability due to mental or nervous disorders -LRB- some put a two year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability due to drug or alcohol abuse -LRB- some put a one year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability caused while committing a crime -LRB- this is usually not covered at all -RRB- , or disability caused by acts of war . Some policies also will cover total or permanent disability , but not partial or residual disability . Again , it is important to shop around and purchase a policy with the features that are most likely to be used , but also pick and choose so that you get a rate you can afford .
Mortality in the United States stubbornly remains at 100 % . If you want to purchase a life insurance policy in anticipation of receiving a death benefit , then a permanent policy is your sole option . All other policies have a termination date . I am using the term permanent because it includes other policies that share these features with a whole life policy . Death is not the only opportunity for receiving benefits from a permanent life insurance policy . Throughout the existence of the policy you have access to the cash value of the policy . You can either withdraw money or take a policy loan . A policy loan does not require an application and can be taken in total privacy . These loans have assisted business owners through stressful period of time , by providing capital to keep the business afloat . Business owners often use permanent life insurance to make sure that funds are available for surviving partners to purchase the interest of a deceased partner in a business . They also use permanent life insurance in compensation packages . Some people use their permanent life insurance policy in their estate plan to pay taxes and to make sure heirs receive equal treatment . It is an excellent way to give a gift to a university or religious organization . The systematic nature of deposits in a permanent life insurance policy has enabled some people to develop significant wealth . It certainly can form the stable component of an overall financial strategy . The return in a permanent life insurance policy is competitive with other high-quality , fixed return assets and can provide tax free distributions as well as income tax free death benefits . Financial planning is about shifting assets . The most important shift is from current consumption to future consumption . You can make a choice between a low-fat caramel macchiato and money in your future . While certain coffee franchise would take offense that is really be beginning of the process . How much are you willing to invest in your future ? Because of its semi-compulsory nature , a permanent life insurance policy is a great place to start . I havent met anyone yet who honestly told me that they have too much permanent life insurance . Usually they are lamenting the escalating cost of their term life insurance . Today a significant amount of life insurance is purchased by people over age 60 . Can you imagine how they would have preferred to have made that purchase thirty years ago for the cost of a stop at the coffee shop ? Whole life insurance is the fully guaranteed permanent life insurance product . It is the basic policy from which all other forms of life insurance have been developed . Some will hold that whole life insurance is too expensive . However , if you are looking for a lifetime of coverage you will find it is very inexpensive unless you are wildly successful investor . If you look at the sum of premiums alone you will find that by life expectancy that term life insurance will have cost a significantly greater amount of money than the whole life .
The BEST life insurance product is the one that meets your needs . Therefore , you must ask yourself ; What is the goal ??? Term and Permanent insurance are two different products for two completely different needs . Term insurance is a product for just that , a fixed term , with either a level premium for the selected term or an increase annual payment if you were to choose renewable term . Since the contract isfor a fixed period of time , premiums are typically a portion of what the same coverage would be with a Permanent product as there are no cash accumulation or surrender features , making it affordable for those who need it . Regardless , term insurance is great for those with a need for coverage in the event of a loss of life , for a fixed term , i.e. the income or performance of the insured will be relied on by others . Additionally , term insurance is a great way for families with a limited income , to protect and provide for the family and young children in the event of the loss of the family breadwinner or equally important , the caregiver -LRB- many `` breadwinners '' undervalue the benefit provided by the stay-at-home spouse and over look childcare costs ! -RRB- which will help with living and education expenses for the surviving family . In the future , these young families can always re-analyze goals and needs and when their income allows , and convert to a permanent product . Term is also very useful for businesses to protect themselves against the loss of production and revenue in the event of a death of a key employee . This type of insurance planning called Key-man coverage , is cost affordable when using term insurance . Lastly , many of the attractive riders that are issued with permanent life policies can also be issued with term policies . Permanent insurance is a product with virtually infinite uses depending on your needs . Permanent life insurance products are just that , permanent for the life of the insured , so long as the owner has paid a sufficient amount of premium to maintain the coverage . In comparison to term , permanent life insurance is more expensive in order to account for the cost of insurance in later years of the insureds life . However , there are multiple advantages to buying permanent coverage as soon as you can afford it when you are younger . Aside from a lower level premium amount to carry the policy to maturity , more time will allow for a larger accumulation of cash value in the policy . This cash value , accumulating at a tax-deferred rate that beats current treasuries , can also be accessed through policy loans and withdrawals in the event of emergency cash needs , can be used as collateral for business or personal loans and can also be used to support you during retirement , assuming that the need for coverage has been reduced . There are two main forms of permanent coverage , Whole Life products and Universal Life products , each with their own attractive features including dividends , increasing death benefit , flexible premiums and crediting rates indexed to stock market performances . Before making the decision to purchase either , be sure to sit down for a -LSB- typically free -RSB- consultation with a licensed life insurance agent who will help you identify both your short term and longer term needs and goals . Together , you should be able to put together an effective plan that will blend affordability and proper protection to meet your life insurance needs .
Yes . Whole life is a permanent life insurance . The premium and the death benefit can be guaranteed for your entire lifetime . So can the cash value . This makes the product an extremely competitive cash accumulation vehicle for the conservative part of your portfolio . And why would you want the premium and the death benefit to be permanently guaranteed ? Well , imagine yourself buying term insurance and then outliving the policy . Now you need to buy another one . And youre older , so the price is automatically higher . And what if you unfortunately have a serious medical condition ? The price could be even higher . Worse , you may not qualify for coverage at all ! Permanent insurance means you permanently dont have to worry about qualifying for coverage . Whole life does that very well . But remember this : these guarantees come at a big cost . Especially the guaranteed cash value . What if you like the idea of permanent guarantees , but want to spend less on the coverage ? You do have an option : guaranteed universal life insurance . You can get the premium and the death benefit guaranteed for your lifetime at least until age 121 :-RRB- . You just wont have any cash guaranteed to grow inside the policy . Guaranteed universal life is also permanent insurance . Its a cheaper version of whole life , without the cash . Kind of like permanent term insurance .
How much life insurance you need and what kind depends on a number of factors . Life insurance plays an important role in your financial and retirement planning . Life insurance creates cash at death and can also offer tax advantaged growth . The first step is to clarify what you want to accomplish and if the need is temporary or permanent . In a family situation , for example , you might want to replace your income , pay off the mortgage , establish an emergency fund , an education fund , pay fees and taxes at death and/or leave a legacy . In this situation , your advisor can help with the calculations . You can find basic calculators online to get you started . In a business situation , you might want insurance to fund a buy-sell agreement , provide a buffer fund for the death of a key person or as an executive or employee benefit . If your need is temporary , such as covering a short term loan , then a term policy is appropriate . If there is a possibility you may need permanent coverage in the future , you should check to see what conversion options to permanent coverage are available . If your need is permanent , which means that you want the coverage to pay when you die , not if you die before the policy expires , then a permanent policy is appropriate . Whole Life and Universal Life are two types of permanent insurance . Permanent cash value insurance has tax preferred growth that you can take advantage of . An independent insurance broker can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
When to buy permanent life insurance ? That is a good question . Some agents recommend buying permanent life insurance for every policy . Some financial consultants recommend never buying permanent life insurance . Both have some valid justifications , but both are rather extreme positions . In real life , with budget limitations , health risks , bear markets , and other considerations , it is hard for me to recommend only one option . Not everyone can afford all the life insurance they need in permanent coverage . Yet buying only term presents the risk of being unable to qualify for a new policy when the current one expires . Putting money in the stock market and savings plans should cover final expense needs , eliminating the need for permanent life insurance . But will those investments and savings be there when you die ? My recommendations are to buy Term insurance for temporary needs , and Permanent insurance for lifelong needs . Specifically , permanent insurance is best for final expense needs such as funeral , burial , paying off credit cards , and other costs associated with putting the deceased to rest . Permanent insurance is recommended if you want to use the policy proceeds to pay estate taxes , pass money to heirs , or bequeath money to a charity . If you use term insurance for any purpose that may find you `` outliving the term '' , you may find that you no longer qualify for a new policy , and that all your plans for your life insurance are moot .
Video Transcript : What is permanent life insurance ? Permanent life insurance could be universal life , it could be whole life , it could be variable life . Any of those 3 are permanent forms . Depending upon how far out you want to go in the maturity date , some of these contracts go to age 100 , some even farther out . Even some guarantee permanent contracts , you can make it small enough in the timeline to actually terminate at age 85 . You want to make sure that if you 're using permanent insurance , you 're telling me that you have permanent financial indebtedness or future obligations that are not going to go away . That 's why we 're not looking at term , you 're looking at permanent forms of insurance to cover indebtedness , future obligation , charitable intent , and to replace a person 's income when they die .
`` Better '' is a completely subjective term in this case . The question is really about covering your risk and whether that risk is temporary or permanent . Term insurance is usually used to offset a temporary risk such as a mortgage or other debt that has a specific term . Whole Life , and other types of permanent insurance , are generally used to cover risks that are ongoing with no expiration date , like your income or living expenses . When working with my clients , we spend more time identifying risks and classifying them as temporary or permanent , then assigning amounts to each . The we match the product to the risk and the budget . If cash flow is n't an issue -LRB- which it usually is -RRB- , I recommend 100 % permanent insurance as it 's the most cost effective over the long run . If you live long enough , the cash value in the policy will equal or surpass the premiums paid , effectively making your net outlay zero or better . What I usually find is that people do have a budget but still want to cover themselves properly and we end up covering the temporary risk with term insurance and the permanent risk with some type of permanent insurance , like whole life . The more important question is n't which is better , but how much is needed . Set up correctly , you could start out with mostly or all term insurance and convert it to permanent as your budget allows . Another factor to consider is age and insurability . The earlier in life you buy life insurance and the healthier you are , the less it will cost . In summary , the best insurance is the insurance you buy now , when you 're younger and healthier . Find a good advisor and he/she will help you determine the amount and type which best fits your situation . Get insured first and lock in your insurability . You can always make changes in the future .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What does permanent disability cover ? This appears to be a mixed question so lets see if I can make mud out of it . What defines `` permanent disability '' ? For the absolute best it would read as follows . . '' unable to do the material aspects of their current occupation and under a doctor 's care . '' That describes the best disability language you can get .
Who needs permanent life insurance ? People with permanent needs . I.e. needs that will not end after a certain number of years . No one knows for certain when death will occur , so funeral expenses will need to be covered by permanent life insurance if the goal is to pay off the funeral with life insurance . Leaving an inheritance to children or grandchildren will require permanent life insurance . If you have Term insurance , pass away after it expires , and can not qualify for or afford a new policy , the money you planned to leave your family will be gone . Most people do n't need all their life insurance in permanent policies , because some of their life insurance needs will be temporary . But when the need will not go away until death , permanent life insurance is the only sure solution .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Yes , Term life insurance can be converted to Whole life or some other form of permanent insurance if : 1 -RRB- The policy you got has the option to be converted , 2 -RRB- you convert it within the time frame noted , and 3 -RRB- you can afford the premium for the converted policy . While a life insurance company may carry many types of permanent coverage , they do not always offer all of them to be used for conversions . Some companies only allow a term policy to be converted to one or two permanent policies , and those may not have all the guarantees or features that you might have chosen if the whole array of permanent products was available to you . Also , the permanent policy will be priced at the rates of that time , and at the age the insured person is at the time of conversion You can reduce the face amount to the minimum allowed for that permanent policy , but even $ 50,000 or $ 100,000 can be costly at an older age and for a permanent product . That being said , being able to convert a Term policy to Whole life or Universal life is a great feature , especially if someone has had a downturn in health after getting their initial Term insurance . There are no health requirements to convert Term life insurance , and the health rating for the converted policy will be the same as it was for the original Term policy .
Life insurance is offered for temporary and permanent protection against the economic liabilities and future obligations of the policy insured : term and permanent life insurance . Term life insurance can generally be purchased in five year increments like 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 & 30 years . Most permanent life insurance can be purchased to cover the inured to age 121 . Permanent life insurance has five basic product lines : participating whole life , guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . You need to determine whether your financial liabilities and future obligations are temporary or permanent . You 'll need to establish whether permanent life insurance is for protection or tax advantaged income . A personal financial profile should assess your risk tolerance , money goals and your life expectancy . This will aid you in selecting the right product for your financial needs .
Yes . Many individuals will set up a short term disability policy as well as a long-term disability policy to cover different types of scenarios -LRB- e.g. if you become permanently disabled vs. being temporarily disabled -RRB- . Some individuals will have a group DI policy through an employer and supplement it with an individual DI policy if they feel the group DI does n't provide enough benefits or a very good `` definition of disability '' -LRB- the most important factor with DI coverage -RRB- - when buying disability insurance , make sure of -LRB- and understand -RRB- the definition of disability that 's being cited in the program -LRB- own occupation , modified , or gainful - this is the most important factor in your disability policy as it will determine if you are eligible for a claim when something happens -RRB- . Please note , disability insurance policies coordinate benefits so there 's a limit to how much coverage and what kind you can secure -LRB- most carriers will keep it to a maximum of 70 % of income - the percentage can vary by insurance company -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help setting up coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
What to look for in Disability Insurance ? While there are many options to consider with disability insurance , a `` good '' disability policy comes down to one defining sentence . The most important thing is `` the definition of what disability IS . '' You see payment from a disability plan all comes down to what qualifies as a disability based on the definition of disability in the contract -LRB- policy -RRB- . If it is not simple and straight forward in this definition , you might want to look elsewhere . Pretty much beyond the first couple sentences about the definition of disability in a DI policy are terms where they take away from the definition , they exclude and make exceptions . The best policies are straight forward without a lot of fluff when it comes to that definition . And with a disability policy , words are everything .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Get Health Insurance For A Few Months ?
You can buy health insurance for a few months . You can also buy coverage for one month . Short-term health insurance plans are ideal for individuals or families that only need coverage for a short period of time . Rates are extremely inexpensive and applications are often approved within 24-36 hours . If you are between jobs , laid off , a graduating student , waiting for Medicare benefits to begin or a seasonal worker , a temporary policy may be worth considering . You can purchase the plans easily online from reputable websites or directly through a broker .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I can give you some examples from cases I have handled . I think you will be surprised . Many people assume they will not qualify for life insurance , and happily , they are wrong . It takes a lot . One fellow needed to purchase several million dollars of life insurance to cover a bank loan for his business . His business was a bar/restaurant . The night before his insurance exam , a few of his buddies came by to socialize a bit . They did cocaine . Of course , he tested positive . No insurance for him . He probably would have qualified for a guaranteed-issue burial policy . But the $ 25,000 would not have done him any good . He needed that bank loan . And he needed life insurance to get it . And you know what ? He didnt get the life insurance , and he didnt get the bank loan . He would have had to wait a few years before he became eligible again . Five years is the industry standard , but I probably couldve gotten it for him sooner . Another candidate also a business owner went to rehab for both drug and alcohol addiction . Unfortunately , he didnt schedule the necessary follow-ups after his treatment . Carriers were worried that a relapse would be right around the corner without the proper support system in place . He will also have to wait a year or two . Then you have people who have a number of serious illnesses that just arent sufficiently controlled . The combination of obesity , heart condition , diabetes , smoking etc. is wicked . Ive had people come to me with these factors in place , and then some . Has to be some measure of control . Otherwise , you look like a walking timebomb . These cases are extreme . Other cases seem scary but can be quite placeable . Pot smoking ? You can get a policy . Bankruptcy ? You can get a policy . On probation for a felony ? You can get a policy . Suspended drivers license ? You can get a policy . Travel to India , or South America , or rural China ? You can get a policy . Mountain climber ? You can get a policy . Deep water scuba diver ? You can get a policy . Of course , a number of important factors need to be in place , but on the overall , it can be done . Surprise !
My mother is 81 and in good health . I have found a few great companies that offer great life insurance products for people of that age group , to 85 . The fact of the matter is , I bought term insurance on her a few years ago -LRB- before I became an agent and did not know better -RRB- now that she is getting older and the premiums keep increasing on the term insurance I can get various types of whole life insurance on her for a couple of hundred dollars more a month in premiums . However , the policies that I have found are at twice or three times the face amount of the term insurance . So , it is possible . You just have to find an agent that will do the research for you . If you live in North Florida I would love to meet with you and discuss the possibilities . If you live in another state , contact one of the knowledgeable and competent agents on here . From the answers I have read they are very good at what they do . If you live outside of the North Florida area , and still have questions for me please feel free to contact me and I will help you any way I can .
Auto insurance premiums can be paid in a few different ways . Policies are usually six month periods and the total premium can be paid by the insured at any time within the six months . Most companies that I have experienced offer different schedules of payment for premiums . Most offer a monthly payment plan with installments due each month and others offer other plans where you can pay two or three times per six months or every other month .
STM -LRB- short term medical -RRB- insurance is real major medical insurance ... but with some limitations . STM plans do not cover any pre-existing conditions . The application process is simple , usually 5 yes/no questions or less . A `` yes '' answer is an automatic disqualifier . Most STM plans have a simple design of a deductible then coinsurance . A few have copays . Every one I have seen includes an Rx discount plan and some have PPO networks . Benefit periods are on a month to month basis with most plans issuing a maximum of 6 months although a few offer 12 month policies . When the benefit term expires so does your coverage . There is no renewal . Instead you apply for a new plan with new underwriting and new pre-existing limits .
The premium for Medicare Part B is $ 104.90 per month in 2014 -LRB- this number can change each year -RRB- . The premium can be higher for individuals whose incomes are in the following brackets : If filing an individual tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- 107,001 - $ 160,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- 160,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a joint tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 = $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 = $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 = $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If filing a married & separate tax return : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less = $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 = $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 and up = $ 335.70 per month If you want to review Medicare supplements to help cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- , contact an independent agent/broker to review Medicare supplement plans available in your zip code . If you would like assistance with your Medicare supplement program or have any other questions , you can send me a private message through the `` contact me '' button .
Most individuals receiving Medicare Part B will pay the standard monthly premium -LRB- $ 104.90 per month in 2014 - this number can change each year -RRB- . Some people may be subject to the higher income penalty if they earn above $ 85,000 on their MAGI -LRB- modified adjusted gross income -RRB- as stated on their individual tax return or married filing single tax return from 2 years prior , above $ 170,000 -LRB- if married filing jointly -RRB- . If filing an individual tax return , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 107,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 107,001 - $ 160,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 160,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 214,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing jointly , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 170,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 170,001 - $ 214,000 - $ 146.90 per month 3 -RRB- $ 214,001 - $ 320,000 - $ 209.80 per month 4 -RRB- $ 320,001 - $ 428,000 - $ 272.70 per month 5 -RRB- $ 428,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month If married filing single , the premium brackets are as follows for 2014 : 1 -RRB- $ 85,000 or less - $ 104.90 per month 2 -RRB- $ 85,001 - $ 129,000 - $ 272.70 per month 3 -RRB- $ 129,001 or more - $ 335.70 per month Part B will pay for approximately 80 % of your physician service expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . If you want to add prescription drug coverage or a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- , you will have additional premium expenses , however , it will help you create a much more predictable healthcare expense structure -LRB- the premiums will also be based on the plan you 're applying for , your age , and other factors -RRB- .
There are carriers that sell just one month policies It depends on the state that you live in . I know that Hallmark insurance based out of texas has this type of policy . otherwise you are stuck with a 6 month policy paying month to month . There are advantages to one month policies however they literally are 30 day policies and after 30 day there is no coverage . As to buying a 6 month policy you can still pay monthly and have a grace period on your billing before it cancels your insurance card will say 6 month on it and you do n't have to get a new insurance card every month . I do not know if any other carrier offers this . I would check with hallmark if that is the type of policy you are looking for you can find them at hallmarkinsco.com hope that helps
You 're eligible for Medicare when you 're turning 65 years old . You can apply for Medicare benefits up to 3 months before , the month of , and up to 3 months after your birth month . I recommend applying during the 3 months before the month you turn 65 so your coverage starts on time -LRB- the first day of your birth month -RRB- - you can be subject to a delayed effective date if you apply during the 3 months after your birth month . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only 80 % of covered healthcare expenses . Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- can help cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . When you first enroll in Part B , you have a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . The advantage of having a Medigap plan to go with your Original Medicare coverage is that it creates a very predictable expense structure -LRB- a major advantage for seniors living on a fixed income -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The time it takes to get life insurance is from a few hours , to a few months . If you apply for a No Exam policy with a company that does not order medical records , the processing time is usually a few days to a few weeks . Some are put into effect shortly after applying via phone interview . If you apply for a policy that requires paramed exam and medical records , the amount of time that it takes to go into effect will depend on how soon you take the exam , and how soon your medical records come in . The underwriter usually waits until everything is in before reviewing your case . If at review time , he or she finds that you had seen another doctor , they might order additional records , which causes further delay . It is helpful to list all the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years on your application , or else even collect medical records yourself , in order to get your policy in effect ASAP .
Yes you can at any time ... But your policy could be canceled short rate and you will be charged a short rate fee . It 's better to switch at renewal unless you are saving lots of money . See if it 's really worth it to switch because also if you have not had insurance for a few months and this is your first policy in a few months you could be losing your prior insurance discount for your next six months , depending on the State you live in . Visit my blog to learn more . WEBSITELINK
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
We represent carriers who look back 35 months , others 36 months , some out to 60 months , and a few out to 84 months . Some types of violations are of interest to carriers who may only ordinarily look back 35 or 36 months . Major cites like a DWI , reckless operation or similar violations will earn you a minimum five year experience period . Some states like Michigan use 2 years for a minor violation and 3 yrs on an accident to match the State 's driver point assessment schedule . Check with your state driving authority for law or permissible practice in your state .
It can take from a few days to a couple of months to get a check from life insurance . You first need to request a claim form , fill it out , and return it to the insurance company with a certified death certificate . The amount of time it takes for them to process the claim and send you the check is a few business days to a couple of months .
You can apply for Medicare up to 3 months before , the month of , and up to 3 months after your birth month . You should apply during the 3 months before the month you turn 65 so your coverage starts on time -LRB- the first day of your birth month -RRB- - you can be subject to a delayed effective date if you apply during the 3 months after your birth month . People are eligible for premium-free Medicare Part A when they turn 65 and have met the 40 quarters -LRB- 10 years -RRB- of working life/paying FICA taxes . Anyone who is eligible for premium-free Part A , can qualify for Part B - Part B requires premiums . Younger individuals with certain disabilities who have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 continuous months and those with end-stage renal disease , may also be eligible to receive Medicare benefits . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- can help cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . When you first enroll in Part B , you have a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan with NO medical underwriting . The advantage of having a Medigap plan to go with your Original Medicare coverage is that it creates a very predictable expense structure -LRB- a major advantage for seniors living on a fixed income -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Health insurance premiums will vary depending on the type of coverage you are purchasing and the number of people you are insuring -LRB- i.e. individual vs. family -RRB- . It will also depend whether or not your state allows insurers to decline applicants and exclude pre-existing conditions . In very broad average terms , you should anticipate between a few hundred dollars a month for an individual and up to a few thousand dollars per month for a family .
Medicare Part B has several enrollment periods that you should be aware of . The enrollment period that you may qualify for may vary based on what your current situation is . The first Medicare Part B enrollment period that most people experience is the `` Initial Enrollment Period '' . This is a 7 month window that starts 6 months before the first day of the month in which you turn 65 and lasts 6 months after the month in which you turn 65 . If you enroll in Part B using this enrollment period your medicare Part B will start on the first day of the month you turn 65 or if you enroll after your 65 birthday your coverage will begin on the first day of the following month . The Part B `` General Enrollment Period '' is for individuals over 65 that do not currently have medicare part B or other creditable health coverage . This period is from Jan 1st through march 31st every year . If you enroll in part B using this General Enrollment Period your Part B coverage will start on July 1st of the same year . There is also a `` Special Enrollment Period '' that begins 63 days before and ends 63 days after the date you lost creditable health coverage from an active employer . You may also qualify for an 8 month Enrollment period that begins on the day you lose employment and/or employment based group health coverage .
The short answer is it depends . When you turn 65 and start your Medicare Part B you will get a 6 month window where you can choose any Medigap Insurance Plan you like . There will be no health questions and you can not be denied . After you turn 65 and are past the 6 month window of signing up for Medicare Part B then you can still get a Medigap Plan . With most carriers there will be 10-12 health questions that you will need to answer in order to get approved . Working with an independent agent that specializes in Medigap Insurance will help you to choose the insurance carrier that fits your health situation the best . Most of the health questions are centered around big and recent health issues . I would not be concerned with getting denied I would just contact an expert to help you through the process . Once you have a Medigap Insurance it is guaranteed renewable which means it can never be canceled on you as long as you pay the premiums . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
Medicare Part A and/or B benefits can start when you turn 65 . You can sign up during the 7 month period that begins three months before turning 65 , includes the month you turn 65 , and ends three months after the month in which you turned 65 . This is called your Initial Enrollment Period . If you sign up for Medicare Part A and/or B during the first three months of your Initial Enrollment Period , your coverage -LRB- in most cases -RRB- starts the first day of your birthday month . If , however , your birthday falls on the first day of the month , your Medicare coverage will begin the first day of the prior month .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Can A 403B Be Rolled Into A 401K ?
As long as your company allows roll overs into their retirement plan , you can roll your 403b money into that 401k plan . One exception may be if you have previously comingled your 403b funds with another IRA . Your company 401k plan administrator should be able to answer your specific questions . You can also roll your 403b into a traditional IRA or Roth IRA . Here is a link to an IRS rollover chart which shows all the directions retirement money can move . WEBSITELINK
As long as your company allows roll overs into their retirement plan , you can roll your 403b money into that 401k plan . One exception may be if you have previously comingled your 403b funds with another IRA . Your company 401k plan administrator should be able to answer your specific questions . You can also roll your 403b into a traditional IRA or Roth IRA . Here is a link to an IRS rollover chart which shows all the directions retirement money can move . WEBSITELINK
A Roth 401k is a designated Roth account . A designated Roth account is a feature in new or existing 401k , 403b or 457b plans that permit such plans to accept designated Roth contributions . The combined amount you can contribute to all designated Roth accounts in any one year for an individual under 50 years of age is $ 17,500 for 2014 . If you are age 50 or older by the end of 2014 , you can add an additional $ 5,500 in catch-up contributions . You can also contribute to both a Roth 401k and a Roth IRA in the same year which can increase the total contribution amount by $ 6,500 if you are 50 or older .
Yes a Variable Annuity can be rolled over most of the time . However , you should be aware of any possible surrender charges associated with the Variable Annuity before you roll it over to a new product . The only exception to this would be if the Variable Annuity was inside a 403b/TSA . Then it would be subject to 403b specific regulations which could very likely prohibit the transfer if you are still employed through that company .
QDRO or a Qualified Domestic Relations Order comes through the courts in a divorce case . This order typically deals with divorce settlements concerning finances and retirement plans such as IRAs , Roth IRAs , 401Ks , 403bs and cash value life insurance plans . If you or your ex spouse owns cash value life insurance , then yes , the cash value is included in QDRO calculations . In most cases , term life insurance plans are not included in these calculations because there is no value unless a death occurs . You or your ex spouse can also be court ordered to carry a term life policy to cover alimony and or child support in case of an early death .
You should know why youre using the retirement plan you have and why youdid n'tselect another . The list of qualified plans has many options : SIMPLE IRA , SEP IRA , 401k , 403b , 457b , 412i , etc. . Non-qualified , but tax advantaged retirement plans like life insurance and annuities .
Simple IRA is actually an acronym for Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees Individual Retirement Account . It is an employer sponsored plan similar to 401ks , 403b , etc. , but with much lower admin costs . It can be funded with pretax dollars , but is still subject to FICA , FUTA , SUTA . The contribution limits for 2013 are $ 12,000 for those age 50 and younger and $ 14,500 for those older than age 50 .
A 401k can be rolled over at most any bank , insurance , investment , financial firm in the country . The type of investment or annuity vehicle is actually the choice you must understand.That vehicle will get you different types of return on your money . Its very important to research where the 401k is rolled over which notifies the IRS or the rollover so it is not taxable .
That is a great question ! Simply put , a 401k rollover is what you call the action of taking the funds from one 401k and moving them -LRB- or `` rolling them over '' -RRB- into another 401k fund , or similar retirement vehicle . This has to be done in a very timely fashion , or there are tax consequences , and is most commonly done when you switch employers , and want to keep funding the 401k . Thanks for asking !
Can you rollover your 401k to a roth ira ? Not really no , there is no provision that allows you to roll the values in your 401k into a Roth without tax penalties . If you did something like this you would need to cash out your 401k which would be taxed at an income tax level combined with your current income , along with a 10 % penalty . So you would be losing roughly 40 % or more of you 401k values . Not something easily made up no matter how good an investment picker you might be .
How do you get your 401k after leaving your job ? Usually you would contact your HR department and see what steps they may require for processing your account . What is important to the situation is what is your plan for those 401k monies . Are you going to roll them over into your new employers plan ? Are you going to roll them over into an individual IRA ? Are you going to convert them to a Roth IRA ? or are you going to take the tax hit and cash your retirement out ?
Why roll over a 401k into a Roth IRA ? Well I ca n't honestly think of a good answer to do this . In order to do this transfer , if you qualify for a Roth in the first place , would require you to cash out your 401k and combined with your current income , might place you in a higher tax bracket , as well as the extra 10 % penalty for early redemption , and possible redemption fees from the 401k as well . So you might be looking at a `` loss '' of anywhere from 35-45 % of the value of your 401k just from taxes and early redemption penalties . What you would have to figure is how many years would it take you to get back to even ? That would include this loss and the loss of gain years spent getting back to even . How about if you qualify , owning both ? Use new money for your Roth . Yes , it will be taxed , but it wo n't be taxed , penalized and require years to recover the market loss . Have both .
Typicallya group retirement savings plan is an employment based retirement savings plan associated with the company you work for . The 401K has become the dominant form of such retirement plans as they are referred to as defined contribution plans rather than the defined benefit pension plans common in past years . Defined benefit pension plans promised the retiree a definite monthly benefit upon their meeting the retirement requirements of the plan and thus created an open ended liability to the employer . Under the 401K , defined contribution approach , generally the employer agrees to match -LRB- up to a certain limit -RRB- the contribution the employee themselves makes to the 401k retirement plan . These funds are then invested and grow tax deferred to build a retirement nest egg for the employee but the employer 's liability is limited to whatever contribution they agree to make during the term of employment of the employee and their liabilities and financial contributions cease with the employee 's retirement or termination of employment -LRB- the employee can roll over their 401K plan funds from one company to another or into individual retirement vehicles but you should discuss these issues with a financial advisor -RRB- .
The appropriate answer here is '' anywhere you want to invest your 401k assets . '' I mean who are you ? What are your goals ? What have you been investing your 401k in ? How can any adviser tell you where to invest after retirement without knowing you ? Sorry , but I think this is a dumb question . Usually , people roll 401k assets over into an IRA . Some employers allow you to stay put and keep your current investments .
You do n't want to close your 401k due to the fact you will be taxed on the income that it generated . The best way is to roll the 401k over so you can take the interest earned tax free there are several ways to do this you need to consult a financial planner and look at somethings this money you save now tax free will be needed much more in retirement due to taxes and inflation .
That is a great question ! A 403b is a retirement plan that is set up for certain occupations , like school teachers , Ministers , and some tax exempt organizations . They can be funded by annuities , custodial mutual fund accounts , or a combination of both . The contributions can be made to an account pre-tax , and taxed upon withdrawal , or they can be in a Roth and taxes on contributions paid in result in tax free withdrawals . You will want to see which plan options are available to you , and speak with an adviser about what would work best for you . Thanks for asking !
That is a great question . Rolling over a traditional tax qualified 401K account to a Roth IRA would generate taxes and penalties so the benefit would certainly not be the tax savings , now would it ? A 401K converion transfer is called a Roth Conversion . There is a conversion option that might work and we call it a `` backdoor Roth IRA '' and it might provide some advantages but will require several steps and tax computations and may not be appropriate for you based on the information provided . Your best answer would be to consult with a local agency to learn more about how this conversion tactics might benefit you in a Roth IRA .
That is a great question ! Once you have started a retirement plan , it remains yours , whether you are with the company or not . They will no longer make contributions to it , and now you wo n't either , so it will sit there in limbo , and grow slowly . Contact your HR person , or plan administrator if you do not know which financial institution is managing the fund , so you can figure out what you want to do . You may be able to roll it into your new employer 's 401k plan , if they offer one . You may be able to roll it into a Roth IRA plan that you establish . If you consider taking the cash from it , be aware that it will be heavily taxed , and you will pay a penalty for removing the cash - plan on giving away at least a third of it , okay ? I hope that helps , contact me with questions if you have them , and thanks for asking !
They are primarily the same thing -LRB- an employer sponsored retirement plan -RRB- but one is offered by a for profit employer and the other -LRB- 403b -RRB- is offered through a government entity such as a municipality or school district . The contribution rules are similar and allow employees to put money away pre tax for retirement .
That is an excellent question ! What happened was that when these policies were first rolled out , the costs of long term care and the average lifespan were still reasonable for insurers to issue coverage for . As time passed , however , the skyrocketing costs of long term care , coupled with longer lifespans created a situation where the insurers were more and more often taking losses on the policies . So they either retooled them , pushing the enrollment age up , lowering benefits , and raising the premiums , or they dropped the policies altogether . There are still some companies out there that offer them , but with the change in the law in 2010 , more people are using their annuity payouts or 401k payouts to cover those long term care costs tax free . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Get The Best Health Insurance Rate ?
There are many steps you can take to get the lowest available health insurance rate . Of course , working with an experienced health insurance broker could potentially save a large amount of money and enrollment time . Here 's why : The calculation of your federal subsidy is critical to understanding which available plans are best for your specific circumstances , and which plans will be the least expensive . For example , cost-sharing `` Silver '' Exchange options are a hidden gem that many inexperienced navigators and brokers may not be aware of . Also , if you miss Open Enrollment or need to buy an `` off-Exchange '' plan , there are specific policies that will work best for you . It 's critical to accurately compare prices and understand why certain plans are the best options .
With the most recent implementation of the Affordable Care Act 's provisions effective January 1 , 2014 the answer to your question in the individual health insurance marketplace is to shop all of the options available to you and do n't smoke . Selecting health insurance plans has n't really gotten any simpler for the consumer so I would recommend you seek out the guidance of a health insurance broker -LRB- it 's not going to cost you any more -RRB- . Tobacco usage is really the only rating variable allowed under the health care reform law and even that option is not applied uniformly by all insurance carriers . However , in today 's individual health insurance marketplace your rates are going to be determined by your age without any considerations for health status , height & weight or sex . So , in practical terms there is virtually nothing the individual consumer can do to impact their health insurance rate
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
Yes , scuba diving can affect life insurance rates . Recreational scuba diving less than 50 feet does not affect rates at all with many life insurance companies , so that if you are able to get the best rating based on your health , your diving will not bring that rating down . Some will allow the best or Preferred rating for divers who are experienced and do not exceed a depth of 75 ' . Being a certified diver and/or diving only in a club or with an instructor helps get the best rates . When dives are over 75 ' or the diver does cave diving , rescue diving or diving alone in remote areas , the scuba diving can bring rates down to Standard , add a flat extra , or even cause a decline . Agents familiar with this type of policy can get all the pertinent details from you and find out ahead of time which company has the best price for your particular type of scuba diving .
How do you get the best insurance rates ? Well , be in the best possible health you can be . Your price you pay for life insurance is simply related to your overall health and health history . Insurance companies create rate classes in which they lay out exactly what health requirements are needed for the insured to get that price . Where you fall into a class health wise , determines your price .
If the only conversion option your policy offers is Whole Life , the rate is probably going to be quite a bit higher than if you take out a new , no lapse , Universal Life policy . However , when you convert Term Life , you are rated the same on your Whole Life that you were rated on your Term policy . So if your health has declined , you may be getting a good deal by converting . If it has not declined , I personally would check out a new policy to see how much you can save . As to when to convert , it depends on several factors . 1 . HOW MUCH you want to convert . If you want to convert it all , it may be a good idea to do it now , while rates are lower . They will go up quite a bit over the next 10 years . 2 . YOUR HEALTH . If you have very poor health , you may just want to pay those low Term rates another 10 years . If you have excellent health , it might be a good time to convert or look at what else you can get in a permanent policy . 3 . WILL YOU NEED LIFE INSURANCE after age 60 ? By the time you are 60 you should have a good idea of whether you will need that much coverage . You have some time to get a feel for how your retirement is going to pan out before you make this big decision . You can not reverse it and go back to Term , once you have converted your policy . Please feel free to contact me to help you ascertain what prices are out there for you , or help you figure out what direction to go . Best wishes .
No , life insurance rates are non-negotiable to the extent that you can not ask for a discount . Likewise , all agents must charge the same rates . When you see an agency advertising affordable rates , what we mean is that we can shop multiple companies to place you with the one that is most favorable for your health and age . When you see an agency broadcasting extremely low prices for life insurance , what they are doing is quoting the best rate for the shortest term . Most brokers have access to those same companies and rates , and applying with one agency over another will not cause you to qualify for a discount . What does matter in life insurance rates is matching up with an agency who understands your situation and can help your policy be placed at the best possible rate . This starts with putting your application with the right company , and it ends with seeing that policy through to the end . If your doctor has retired and moved to the Bahamas and no one can find the medical records required to get your policy approved , this agency will track them down or work with the underwriter to get you approved without them . If you are rated up due to an error on your MIB , they will help you get it corrected and go back for a lower rate . If your spouse loses their job and you can no longer afford the 30 year term policy you were approved for , they help you get the 10 year term until you are back on your feet . While insurance agents can not negotiate life insurance rates , we can be responsible and knowledgeable and help you get the lowest rates by simply doing our job correctly and thoroughly .
There is no set guideline to how much you should pay for Term Life Insurance . There are general guidelines . E.g. . If you take a 10 year term policy , you should pay less than you would pay for a 30 year term policy . If the rates are similar you are much better off locking that rate in for 30 years . Another general guideline would be , if you can get a permanent policy for a price just slightly higher than term , take the permanent policy . Sometimes Universal Life rates run close to Term rates at older ages , especially if the UL rates are locked in to age 90 or 95 . Universal Life is much more flexible than Term , so if you can get it for a similar price , go for it . Aside from generalities , no one can predict how much you should pay for a term life insurance policy because life insurance rates are based on your age , sex , tobacco status , and health . You can check out an instant quote engine on internet websites to get an idea of what term rates might run for you . But you need to call the agency to get a more accurate rate .
Hello , In order to buy Life Insurance in New York State you must consult with an honest agent and fair agent that explains to you about the policy and how you benefit from the policy . There are different forms of Life Insurance which are Whole Life , Universal Life and Term Life . There are also some other types of Life insurance depending on your needs . The best way to buy is from a secure company with a high financial rating . Also look for lowest rates and other riders that can be added in order with alow rates . Other products from Life Insurance Companies will be Critical Illness Insurance which is Cancer , Stroke , Accident , andHeart Attack . It is always best to arrange an appointment with an agent in order to get more information on products and benefits and how they can benefit you and your family . Independent Agents as myself are known to offer a wider range of products and services and lower rates because we deal with a larger base of carriers , therefore , giving you the benefit of choosing the best product for you at the best , and lowest rates . As an Independent Agent , Iworkwith the bestcarriers with strong financial ratings and with a complete heritage that goes way back .
There is no one best life insurance company , and no one best type of life insurance policy . Life insurance companies are rated by rating agencies -LRB- AM Best , Standard and Poore 's , Moody 's and Fitch are the most popular -RRB- . You can look at their ratings with each agency to see how life insurance companies compare with each other . Regarding types of life insurance policies , sometimes Whole Life is best , sometimes Universal Life best suits a particular need , sometimes Term Life works best . To find the best company and policy for you and your particular need , you can visit with a reputable agent and ask them to find you the best qualify product that is suitable for your needs .
Who has the cheapest life insurance or rather who has the best rates for life insurance ? The company that has the best rates for insurance at a particular age and for a specified amount varies . No one company has all the best rates . Perhaps the best way to answer this is to change the question to : How do I find the best rates for term insurance ? You could start with an online quoting service to give you a point of reference . Be sure and compare renewal rates along with the initial premium . There are more factors to consider than simply price . Which is why you would best be served by working with an independent insurance broker who can access several companies to get you the right plan at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Getting the best life insurance quotes can be like walking a tightrope . Some agents will quote low just to get your application . Then when you are approved , they simply send you the policy , assuming you will be tired of the process and just give in and accept it.Other agents quote high because they would rather give you good news that your rate turned out lower than higher than quoted . What really matters in the end , is that you get a policy with a life insurance company that is favorable to your type of health , age , and the type of policy you get -LRB- Term , Whole Life , or Universal Life -RRB- . So no matter what quote you get , you need to pay close attention to the credentials of your agent . Some things to look at are : 1 -RRB- Are they able to shop for you from more than one company ? 2 -RRB- Do they ask questions to determine what policies and ratings you qualify for ? 3 -RRB- Do they appear to understand your health condition -LRB- s -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Do they have a following as evidenced by testimonials , referrals , etc ? 5 -RRB- If they have a website , does it have security and privacy features ? 6 -RRB- Do they appear to be sincere and honest ? If you can get in touch with an agent who has those credentials , chances are that your quote will be as accurate as possible . More importantly , no matter what your quote is , you will have the best chance at being approved at the best rate with the best company for your particular health and age .
Depending on your state the rates can be as little as 20 a month or much more . The rate factor is based on the area you live in and yes your credit plays a part . However if you have good credit they give you a preferred rate but if your credit is not the best in our state then you get the standard rate . They do not put you in a high risk if your credit is not the best . Also in our state being married or your sex plays no affect on your premiums . There are many online carriers but a local agent can sometime be more helpful and making sure you are properly covered and discuss your needs when you shop online only you never get to talk to the same person and they may or may not be able to sell you the best coverage at the best rate . our agency specializes in 24/7 service is an important factor also . I personally answer the phone . NEVER have to call an 800 number and never have to worry about your information being sold to other companies so that you are getting slammed with emails and phone calls from other carriers trying to sell you insurance . Al Local agent can also quote with 100 's of companies also . Unless they are a captive agent which means they can only sell one carrier . As always you can contact your State insurance commissioner and ask them about the carriers in your state including online companies and the complaints they have or have not received . Like our mission statement says Where you can simply Trust to expect the best . We compare rates for you and if we do not have the best fit for you we will recommend other agencies and carriers . It is all about service
An employer can not discriminate against an employee based upon their age -LRB- among a multitude of other factors -RRB- . However , that does not necessarily mean that an older employee who compares what they are contributing towards their employer based health insurance with a younger co-worker of the same coverage level will find themselves paying the same amount . This may initially be perceived by the older employee as though they are being discriminated against but this is almost certainly not the case . If your employer 's group health insurance rates are age based rates then there is a different rate for each year of age for a covered employee . The community rating requirements of ObamaCare have pushed many health insurance carriers towards this age rated basis though some health insurance carriers still develop a `` composite '' rate for a group after quoting them on an age rated basis -LRB- composite rates are one rate for every employee with Employee Only , Employee + Spouse , Employee + Child -LRB- ren -RRB- or Family coverage regardless of the employee 's age -RRB- . This is how things work under community rating . First of all , there can be no more than a 3 to 1 ratio between the rates for the youngest and oldest employees in the group . To keep things simple let 's say the monthly rate for a 25 year old is $ 200 per month then the monthly rate for a 60 year old would be $ 600 per month . Then let 's say that your employer pays 50 % of the employee only rate which leaves the other 50 % for the employee to pay . Under this scenario the 25 year old 's cost would be $ 100 per month -LRB- $ 200 x 50 % -RRB- and the 60 year old 's share would be $ 300 per month -LRB- $ 600 x 50 % -RRB- . Even though the dollar amount paid by each employee differs significantly the employer is treating them the same in that the employer is contributing the same percentage amount towards each employee 's coverage . Therefore , there is no discrimination . This is one of the effects of ObamaCare that is increasingly being seen by employees as their old health insurance plans and rate structures are being replaced by ObamaCare compliant plans and the new community rating method .
You can get health insurance online in Texas ! The easiest and most efficient way to obtain the best rates and best coverage is through an experienced broker . That 's our job and why we have top-rated websites . The . gov website is still not free from glitches , delays and security concerns . And most experienced health insurance brokers can offer `` off-Exchange '' plans which you can not get through the government website . A broker will help determine the amount of your federal subsidy , so you can view how much your Texas health insurance rate will reduce and which options are the best . If you missed Open Enrollment , a broker can review short-term plan options and other viable choices .
When this question is asked I am not sure if you mean the best insurance company with coverage 's and claims or the who has the best rates . Let 's address rates first : There is no company who has the best rates as there are many varying factors that can make one insurance company rise to the top over another as it pertains to premium . In other words who has the best rate for me may not be the best for you , and we could live right next door to each other . Now lets move on to the more important issue and that is coverage 's : What you have to understand is most insurance companies have varying options/packages of coverage 's available to purchase . In most cases agents tend to offer the cheapest package which does not maximize coverage 's that are potentially available to the client . I suggest when shopping for insurance that you truly consult with your agent about the different options available by an insurance company so you can make an educated decision on the coverage you wish to purchase and how much of the risk you yourself wish to assume . As an independent agent I am able to offer quotes and coverage 's from multiple companies to help my clients make the most informed decision about their most important asset , and that is their home . Now the next subject would be claims : Which insurance company continues to rise to the top in claims handling . There are many independent websites which you do a quick search on and find ratings on how well claims are handled and their overall customer satisfaction and loyalty . There are many companies that are great in the claims area that I bet you have never even heard of . You will also find negatives on every insurance company out there without exception . Most of the negatives are due to coverage 's not being in place that the client thought they had . Or in other words . A lack of understanding their policy . This goes back to my suggestion on being educated on the coverage 's available to you . There are many independent online reviews available to you -LRB- some good , some not so good -RRB- that will give you ratings on how well the claims experience is for clients and how insurance companies rank in the claims department . But there is one thing that I believe is very critical to the claims process and that is your agent . An absentee agent can make the process very frustrating if you are having some communication difficulty with the insurance company . An agent that is actually working for you can help make any unfortunate claims experience must less painful then it needs to be . So never take the agent out of the equation when shopping for homeowners insurance . So with all that being said , my parting advice is do your research , consult and ask lots of questions from your agent . Do n't be shy are think it 's a dumb question because it 's not . After all , were talking about your home .
Every rating agency has their own ratings . With AM Best , A + + is their best rating . With Fitch , their highest rating is AAA . Moody 's highest rating is Aaa . S&P 's best life insurance company rating is AAA . Weiss 's highest rating is A + . The companies with the best ratings will have high ratings from all these agencies .
A great question and one that the answer for allows us to contrast how a product or service can evolve over time into something quite different from it 's original concept . Over a century ago health insurance was introduced as a financial protection against serious injury or illness . At that time and for decades after , the state of the medical arts was such that there was little your doctor or local hospital could do to deal with your cancer or heart attack other than dull the pain . People 's life expectancies were much shorter than today and a whole host of medical conditions we recognize and treat in the 21st century were unrecognized or untreatable . Wage and price controls imposed by the Roosevelt administration during WWII became the catalyst for wide spread employer based health insurance as employee benefits were not subject to these government controls and offering benefits gave employers a recruitment advantage in the labor force short marketplace of that era . This practice continued and expanded along with the American economy in the post war era and became institutionalized . What has changed in our lifetimes have been the advances in health care , the things that we now consider as being healthcare -LRB- do you ever wonder how our ancestors who were dealing with wars , attacks by native Americans , droughts & floods dealt with stress and depression before we had a pill for everything ? -RRB- , the fact that we live much longer and the introduction of government programs such as Medicare and Medicaid which expanded access to health care while at the same time introducing pricing distortions in the health care marketplace . These government programs , no matter how noble their intent , have never paid market rates for health care and set in motion the cost shifting process by medical providers of inflating their charges for those in private health insurance . Since the late 70 's health insurance has evolved from just protection against catastrophic loss into much more of an ongoing maintenance contract that covers more and more of the routine areas of health care people once paid for themselves . Kind of like buying a car and having all the oil changes & tire rotations included for `` free '' , they 're not really free but are buried into the higher cost you are paying for the car . So , that is how the health insurance concept originated and the story of how it has morphed into the major social and political issue our nation is struggling with today .
Who sells the best whole life insurance ? Well in my many years as both a captive and independent I can answer truthfully , a lot of companies . The best thing about life insurance is that there are many companies that occupy that top of the table where best could apply to any of them . You may see from time to time , advertisements from companies showing they 're best for 250k coverage . What they put in small print would be male age 35 best possible class . Why ? because they may not be best for females age 30 standard plus class . The best place to be company wise will simply depend on who you are , how your health is , how much coverage you buy and do you smoke ? Your answers may make the best company be entirely different than somebody else like your spouse for example .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
end question
start question
annuities
Can Annuities Be Rolled Over ?
In most cases yes . If the annuity is a qualified annuity then you must roll it into a qualified plan or risk being penalized . A non-qualified annuity can be rolled over into a different annuity if the new annuity is more suitable and contains greater advantages than the original annuity .
yes a variable annuity can be rolled over . Its no different than rolling over any other investment vehicle . You simple must make sure its it rolled over into a IRA or approved retirement instrument . The variable annuity is usually tied to a Mutual Fund . So timing is everything but not always logical to try roll over with the price share being its highest .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is funded with before tax contributions . Income tax has not been paid on either the amount contributed to the plan , the employers contribution if any , or the gain the plan has realized . That income tax would need to be paid if the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- were rolled into a Roth IRA . The preferred method for any roll-over is a direct , trustee to trustee exchange . If you accept your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- in cash you must roll-over the amount quickly and carefully . See a licensed insurance agent to accomplish this roll-over .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- rollover simply means that you are taking your funds in your current 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and moving them , rolling over , into an IRA , Individual Retirement Account . You can also transfer the your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to another 401 -LRB- k -RRB- as well if you are working for a new employer and they have a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- option . By rolling over your monies , you avoid any tax consequences as the money remains tax-deferred . There are several options for rolling these monies to an IRA . I usually recommend rolling them into an Annuity , a Fixed Indexed Annuity . The reason is to preserve the moneys you have worked so hard to get . You are guaranteed to never lose your initial balance and usually get market like gains . When you retire , if the account was set up correctly , you can get a lifetime income as well . If you are looking at options and would like more information , do not hesitate to contact your broker adviser . If you do not have one or would like a new perspective , contact me .
In most cases yes . If the annuity is a qualified annuity then you must roll it into a qualified plan or risk being penalized . A non-qualified annuity can be rolled over into a different annuity if the new annuity is more suitable and contains greater advantages than the original annuity .
Yes a Variable Annuity can be rolled over most of the time . However , you should be aware of any possible surrender charges associated with the Variable Annuity before you roll it over to a new product . The only exception to this would be if the Variable Annuity was inside a 403b/TSA . Then it would be subject to 403b specific regulations which could very likely prohibit the transfer if you are still employed through that company .
A 401k can be rolled over at most any bank , insurance , investment , financial firm in the country . The type of investment or annuity vehicle is actually the choice you must understand.That vehicle will get you different types of return on your money . Its very important to research where the 401k is rolled over which notifies the IRS or the rollover so it is not taxable .
As long as your company allows roll overs into their retirement plan , you can roll your 403b money into that 401k plan . One exception may be if you have previously comingled your 403b funds with another IRA . Your company 401k plan administrator should be able to answer your specific questions . You can also roll your 403b into a traditional IRA or Roth IRA . Here is a link to an IRS rollover chart which shows all the directions retirement money can move . WEBSITELINK
An FSA is the abbreviation for a Flexible Spending Account plan which is an IRS approved means of allowing employees to set aside payroll deducted dollars on a pre-tax basis to use for several different types of employee personal expenses . Most people encounter an FSA in the context of setting aside money to cover medical , dental or vision expenses not covered by their group health insurance plan but you are not required to be enrolled in a health insurance plan in order to take advantage of your employer 's FSA plan . Also , there are types of FSAs -LRB- Dependent care is an example -RRB- that I wo n't go into at this time . For 2014 the maximum amount an individual can set aside in an FSA has been reduced to $ 2500 . But this change has been somewhat offset by a change to the `` use it or lose it '' rule which in past years meant that any unused dollars in an FSA account at the end of the plan year were forfeited by the account holder . Now up to $ 500 in unused FSA funds can be rolled over from one plan year to the next . Such rolled over funds do not count against the $ 2500 maximum deduction the employee can make in the subsequent FSA plan year so some accumulation in now allowable if your employer has amended their FSA plan document to allow for this . An additional take away though is that over the counter medications are no longer eligible for reimbursement from an FSA . Setting aside funds in an FSA account reduce the employee 's gross taxable income on a dollar for dollar basis . So , depending upon the tax bracket an employee is in , the potential tax savings could be in the 25 % to 40 % range when Federal , Social Security and possibly state taxes are taken into account . An FSA can be a very cost effective tool in helping employees get more value by paying for eligible out-of-pocket expenses .
An IRA is a qualified retirement plan . It can be rolled over to another IRA or if you 're willing to pay the ordinary income tax in the year of transfer , a Roth IRA . Many plan participants roll over their company qualified plans into on IRA when they terminate their employment .
Assuming youre referring to 457 -LRB- b -RRB- retirement plans , 457 -LRB- b -RRB- deferred compensation plans that are available in government and non-government organizations under 501 -LRB- c -RRB- . Theres no 59 penalty as long as the plan participant is retiring or ending employment . Government 457 can be rolled personal over to IRAs . Nonprofit workers can only roll their 457 plans over to another 457 plan . 2013 contribution limits are $ 17,500 and an extra $ 5,500 if you are age 50 or older .
Smart question . You are thinking ahead , seeing that Life Insurance is there as a retirement tool also , not just a death benefit , when you choose Whole Life Insurance . An experienced agent should go over with you the detailed needs you now have and can expect . Such things as the mortgage , a spouse , kids , your income and standard of living . Think of it as a pyramid with a ball rolling down it . The only thing that keeps the ball up now is your income . Later you will need life insurance for your family to keep that ball from down and their standard of living from rolling down with it . During retirement , however , you need to think about being able to take money from your growing whole life policy , to help fund your retirement . The more your expenses will be , the more whole life you will need to get now . Think of retirement as a week of Saturdays . Saturday is the most expensive day of the week for most . Retirement will probably be like all Saturdays for many . If your whole life policy started as $ 1 million , it could easily grow over time to a death benefit of $ 4 million . If you borrow against it for retirement , something that is regularly done by a few insurance plans , you may reduce that benefit over time , but the policy still continues to grow as though the money had remained in . The death benefit still could be more than sufficient , and your retirement could be very pleasantly funded too . You need an experienced agent to work with to make this happen . Gary Lane , Registered Representative and Agent with New York Life , 9497972424 . Thank you .
Rolling over a life insurance policy -LRB- also known as a 1035 exchange -RRB- refers to taking the cash value in one permanent policy and contributing it -LRB- rolling it over -RRB- to a new policy as part of the first year premium payment in a new policy . The purpose of this is to lower your monthly premium . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any questions . Thanks very much .
How do you get your 401k after leaving your job ? Usually you would contact your HR department and see what steps they may require for processing your account . What is important to the situation is what is your plan for those 401k monies . Are you going to roll them over into your new employers plan ? Are you going to roll them over into an individual IRA ? Are you going to convert them to a Roth IRA ? or are you going to take the tax hit and cash your retirement out ?
Yes , you can roll a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- into a Variable Annuity as long as the Variable Annuity is a qualified account , an IRA . Be sure to look closely at Variable Annuities . I do n't usually recommend rolling a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- into these as there is market risk meaning you can lose the money you have worked so hard for . Be sure you understand the pro 's and con 's in relation to what your goals are . Seek an adviser or contact me if you want to look at some recommendations based on what your future goals are .
To buy annuities , you shop for them from insurance agents . If purchasing a fixed or indexed annuity , the life insurance agent must be licensed in life insurance . If purchasing a variable annuity , the agent must also have some securities licenses . You will review the features of different options , make your decision , then pay the premium that puts your annuity into effect . If your money is tied up elsewhere , you may need to roll it over into the annuity .
To see fixed annuities , it takes an insurance license in Life and Annuities -LRB- the Life license covers both -RRB- . To sell variable annuities , it takes a series 6 -LRB- limited investment securities license -RRB- or series 7 license . The latter entitles the representative to work with all types of securities products , minus commodities and futures . If the agent selling fixed annuities needs to roll over funds from a qualified plan into the fixed annuity , a series 6 or 7 license is also required .
I am not a CPA . The character of the program hasnt changed . I am pretty sure that the money can be rolled into a Roth IRA without difficulty . You should understand that rollovers are coming under increasing scrutiny . Make sure that you fully understand the implications of the roll-over .
As you approach retirement you should try to find a planner who is willing to help you with retirement income planning . This is an emerging field but addresses the issue that you have raised . Converting your assets into something that you can spend is critical and advice is usually important . As a holding instrument you can roll proceeds of a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- into an IRA . You dont gain anything tax wise in doing a roll-over , however , you might gain greater control of your asset and an increased ability to plan disbursing money .
Non-qualified annuities can not be `` rolled over '' into a qualified plans . Now that 's not to say that proceeds from a surrendered annuity ca n't be used as a contribution into your qualified plans , but taxation and penalties could present a negative economic result for using those funds for a qualified retirement plan . Check with your tax consultant first before moving forward with your annuity .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover Getting Your Tubes Tied ?
It greatly depends on the type of policy you have , & whether it is deemed medically necessary , or elective . You may be able to pay only co-pays if you have a group policy , or a percentage if you have an individual policy . Many supplemental policies such as Aflac , will actually pay you , a reimbursement , for each day in the hospital , Ambulance transpiration , & other procedures you may go through . Best to have your specific policy reviewed by a professional .
Voluntary sterilization is often covered under many group health insurance plans . Tubal ligation as well as vasectomy are common forms of permanent birth control . The vasectomy is a much simpler operation usually performed on an outpatient basis in a doctor 's office . Tubal ligation is more invasive , performed under general anesthesia in a hospital . Tubal ligation is often performed in conjunction with other `` female '' surgery such as a hysterectomy or D&C .
As a general rule , no . A health insurance policy does not cover reversal of a vasectomy . Likewise for `` untying '' a female 's tubes -LRB- reversing tubal ligation -RRB- . Both are elective procedures . Only treatment deemed medically necessary is a covered expense item under a health insurance policy . This is true for individual plans as well as employer group plans .
A homeowners policy pays for damages caused by specified perils . If the heating system in a home is damaged by fire , for example , it would have been caused by a specified peril . If it broke because of age or poor maintenance , it wouldnt be covered . Those arent specified perils . Recently there have been thefts of the tubing going to heat pumps . That would probably be covered .
Medical care has a price . In the open market it is fixed by consumers who want a service and medical personnel who can deliver the service . The problem occurs when someone needs the treatment but can not or will not pay the price for the service . I say , Will not because every decision about spending is discretionary . Should society as a whole bear the responsibility for the medical care for every resident ? Should the nature of that care be regulated ? Should the source of funding be general ? Those are the most pressing questions when considering a universal health care system . Ultimately in a universal health care system there is a specified list of services and a funding mechanism that is not based upon need for medical services . You may need a procedure that isnt covered in the program . At the same time you might consider another procedure immoral or frivolous . Who is going to decide ? The idea of universal health care sounds very good until you understand that some medical services will probably not be covered . In the USSR dental hygiene consisted of inserting a fluorescent tube into the patients mouth and surgery was routinely conducted in a super-cold environment because anesthesia was not readily available . In that case , most Americans would consider the health care to be inadequate . However , it was available to all and at little or no direct cost to the consumer . Under most regimes universal health care becomes rationed health care . The best example is the army under war time conditions . It is called triage but it means that you treat those with the greatest likelihood of recovery before treating soldiers with graver injuries . While it might be the best utilization of manpower , the soldier with his leg blown off , might not like the wait and a narcotic shot is not going to make his family happy . The issue of who is going to pay for the universal health care system is the most sensitive . No one wants to see others in need . By the same token no one wants to pay the high bill for medical treatment . If the universal care is funded by general funds from taxes it will always be a political football . If it is paid by premiums paid by individuals there will always be a need to assist those unable to pay the premium . The problem really boils down to our expectations of treatment level , the availability and cost of that treatment and who is going to pay the price . Yes , it sounds like a great idea but it has many difficulties and when it is expected then the society will start to question the need for universal flat screen TVs , micro-wave ovens and wall-to-wall carpets . There really isnt an end unless you look at the Soviet Union and see how it ended .
Essure is a medical procedure that is used by women for birth control purposes . A device is implanted into the fallopian tubes and there has been some women that has found it to be satisfactory while others have found it unacceptable . This procedural details can be found in great detail on the internet if you want more details
Every homeowners application I have seen asks the question is there aluminum wiring ? They also ask if there is knob and tube wiring . These forms of electrical distribution only exist in homes over 40 years of age . These forms of wiring are potentially hazardous . Most insurers are not interested in houses with either form of wiring . That doesnt mean that it would be impossible to find coverage , however , rewiring the home may be a less costly option .
In my opinion , the best way to itemize all of your belongings for a Renters Insurance policy is to either take pictures of all items of significant value , along with a note describing when you bought the item , where , and at what price , or video tape your belongings and narrate when you bought them , where , and at what price . Then put the pictures or video on a USB Flash Drive and have someone hold it for you , do n't store it on the property that is insured . A safe deposit box , your friend or family member , or even your insurance agent themselves -LRB- I provide this service for my customers at no charge -RRB- are all good examples of who can hold this for you . From that point on , you only need to document any new items of significant value that you purchase , and remove any items you trade away or sell . -LRB- Do n't worry about recording every six pack of tube socks you buy , just the items that carry some value to them -RRB- . Of course , you can also write all this down on paper , but having visual evidence goes a long way in helping to determine what items were present when the policy was put in force , and what new items have been added . And , it 's always best to review your coverage every year with your insurance agent to make sure you are carrying the right amount of personal property coverage .
People who have been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea can be eligible for three months of CPAP -LRB- Continuous Positive Airway Pressure -RRB- if that is determined medically necessary . If the CPAP therapy is helpful , Medicare may extend the length of time that the machine rental and purchase of related supplies -LRB- mask , tubing -RRB- is covered .
When the cause of the power surge is outside the residence , damage caused by that power surge is excluded from coverage in most homeowners policies . Most policies specifically exclude damage to tubes , transistors or similar electronic component . If the type of damage you have experienced is different , please contact your agent .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
From me , of course . If you are like most Americans shopping for health insurance is not only about as exciting as watching paint dry but you also find yourself in a world you do n't fully understand and where the people seem to speak a foreign language . Of course , you can always go online and shop around or , even more fun , go to HealthCare.Gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace and shop there . That works for some people but millions of others have learned the painful lesson that there are a lot of factors to consider when making a purchase as important as health insurance that are very difficult to present concisely on a web site . Seek out the services of a qualified life and health insurance agent . An independent agent not tied to one specific insurance company can shop the entire marketplace for you and can be impartial . An agent with additional professional certifications such as Chartered Benefits Consultant , Certified Employee Benefits Consultant , Registered Health Underwriter are examples of professionals who have taken their education and training beyond the simple requirements to get a life and health insurance license . These are the characteristics I would recommend you look for in a health insurance agent . It does n't cost you anything extra to get these professional 's services and they do all the work , can answer your questions , and point out those not so obvious issues with provider networks , how your specific medical and/or prescription needs are covered by different plans that the average consumer often misses or does n't even know to ask about . ObamaCare has not made all health insurance policies equal , quite the opposite in fact . Ask your friends or co-workers , do an Internet search for health insurance agents , or contact me . But you 'll be glad that you got professional guidance on this matter .
A variable annuity like a fixed annuity allows the owner to accumulate money on a tax deferred basis . Both types of annuities allow the owner to select a lifetime income to settle the contract . There are variations of that privilege but that is the basic benefit . The accumulation of money for the fixed annuity is guaranteed by the insurance company issuing the policy . The accumulation of money for the variable annuity allows the owner to select from a group of accounts , some of which are tied to publicly traded securities . The insurance company does not guarantee those securities that are tied to publicly traded securities .
I suspect you are asking about `` supplementary '' insurance . Secondary insurance is a term associated with when a person is covered under 2 different health insurance policies . Most commonly when a husband and wife both work at different employers and one or both are enrolled in their employer 's health plan and are covering their spouses as dependents . In this situation the two policies will `` coordinate benefits '' and one policy will cover what the other does not . But there is really no `` best '' in this situation , it 's just whatever coverage the other spouse has . Supplementary policies are numerous and varied and are offered by a growing number of insurance carriers . Some supplementary policies are specifically designed to cover health insurance plan deductible and other out-of-pocket expenses . Others can be targeted for specific situations such as cancer and critical illnesses . The sad fact is that there is no objective measure that can tell you what the `` best '' supplementary policy is for your specific situation . Some consumers will associate lots of advertising and the branding of a certain aquatic fowl with being the best . This may or may not be true . Seeking out the advice of an independent health insurance agent would be in your best interest if you are in the market for supplementary coverage . Agents tied to one specific insurance company can only show you that insurance company 's products and so their objective will be to fit your needs into their box whether it 's the best fit for you or not .
After we deal with the reason for the suspension not being citations and accidents , then we can look at the other possible complications . Today , computerized records and coding make the suspension a matter of record . Why were you suspended ? In many jurisdictions you can have your driving record suspended for failing to pay child support , or failing to pay a parking violation . The shortest answer is that the presence of a `` suspension '' on your MVR is an issue that can impact your insurability in the eyes of the employer and their insurance carrier . If the suspension can be clearly tied to a non-driving activity , you may be able to prevail with the employer and their insurance carrier and have the presence of the `` suspension '' overlooked . If your suspension is even remotely tied to driving activities , then this reflects on behavior and accountability and will have an impact on your employer and you as a driver on the company insurance coverage . Those impacts can range from a significant surcharge to being ineligible for coverage . The choice does n't belong to the company either . The carrier will need to be convinced your `` suspension '' is n't as relevant as it may otherwise appear . That is an uphill climb in most instances .
Permanent life insurance is NOT bad ! There are a number of different types of `` permanent '' life insurance and some are better than others depending on your goals and needs . What is bad is when sales people misrepresent the policy they are selling ! Permanent insurance includes Whole Life , Universal Life , and the variations of Universal such as Indexed , variable and variable indexed . Variable basically means that it 's tied to the stock market . Indexed basically means that it 's tied to a particular `` index '' such as the S&P 500 . Whole Life is the only one with Guaranteed Premiums , Cash Value growth and Death Benefit with no downside risk .
Variable term life insurance ? Never heard of that ! You may be thinking of a variable ` premium ' or `` flexible premium '' life insurance . . ? As Peggy mentioned above , variable products have cash value and term policies do not . The `` variable '' component in those products is the amount of interest earned , because they are tied to investments in the stock market . A flexible premium life insurance would be a Universal Life policy , which is actually similar to a term policy where the cost of insurance goes up and once that exceeds what is being paid in premiums the sach value is consumed until there is no more insurance . There is such a thing as `` indexed '' universal Life , which is tied to a stock index and therefore the interest paid into the cash value will vary depending on the performance of the index .
Very simply , Variable products are tied to the stock market and thus are exposed to risk . Just as is the case when a person invests in the stock market or any other vehicles tied to the market there is the chance that there may be gains , and there is the possibility that there will be losses . The biggest `` pro '' is that the death benefit is guaranteed and will not be lost no matter how poorly the market performs .
Mutual Funds are securities tied to the stock market . They are subject to the gains and losses of the market more directly than an annuity . An Indexed annuity is tied to stock indexes but they are much safer than a mutual fund in that you are protected from the losses of the market . Since you have that protection , you will generally not have the gains of the stock market . Annuities are safe money and a good way to provide for an retirement without the risk . Mutual Funds and stocks have more risk but greater gain potential . Which is better for you depends on your personal situation , goals , and risk tolerance .
-- > Normal 0 Im sure your insurance company would say yes to that question and I would say most homeowners will find their premium does increase each year . Usually there are two reasons . Insurers increase their rates and insurers tend to increase the amount of insurance on your home by inflationary factors tied to increased construction costs in your area . But that doesnt mean your premium has to increase every year , it means it may be time to take a closer look at your policy and premium . If you want your policy to pay to rebuild your home if it is destroyed and the cost to rebuild your home has increased , increasing the amount of insurance may be appropriate . But increasing the amount of insurance does not necessarily mean your premium must increase . You may be entitled to additional credits for not filing any claims , structural updates or improvements or added security . Maybe your credit score has improved and you are eligible for more favorable rating treatment . You may even want to check with other insurers to see if they offer more favorable terms . But bottom line , there is no reason your homeowners insurance premium should go up each year . You just have to take a look at it , find out why and see what your alternatives are .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Should I Buy Life Insurance ?
The first step in buying life insurance is to determine how much coverage you need , what type of insurance will work best for your needs , and how much it will cost . With life insurance you can not just pick out the policy with the features that you like . You must qualify medically , and your overall mortality risk -LRB- or lack thereof -RRB- determines your rate . What company you use and the type of policy you choose also figure into the premium you will pay . So the best way to buy life insurance is to talk to an agent who can help you determine how much you need , explain what types of policies work best for that need , and then shop around to find the best rate for which you qualify . Good life insurance agencies stick with you and guide you through to the time when the policy you want is in your safe , ready to go into action if tragedy strikes . While a life insurance agent is the last person most people wish to consult , in the end , most policies require an agent as the middle person , anyway . Starting out by calling an honest agent can make the process very simple and help you save hundreds of dollars .
Life insurance is very personal . Most people need an advisor that they trust . A trusted life insurance agent is the source of information and advice that you probably require . If you havent established that relationship get recommendations from friends , colleagues or neighbors . The good agent will listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . There really isnt a one way approach that meets every persons needs , so trust the agent to guide you .
The best way go get Life Insurance is to find the best company that can fit your needs financially . Many companies are perfect fits and have product bases stronger than the other . I deal with many companies and can indicate the . best coverages for anyone . It is always best to speak with an agent for better advice . Some factors to determine will be future financial needs , age , health , and daily living habits . Most important is to determine an estate or pay for high funeral costs that may occur in the event of sudden mishap or the passing of any insured .
My first bit of advise regarding HOW one should go about buying life insurance is to do a little research . The better informed you are about providers and the types of policies , the better chances are that you 'll get the best policy for your needs and goals . Of course that will necessitate that you have a good handle on exactly what your needs and goals are ! But there may be some living benefits connected to some policies that you are n't aware of , such as the cash value and wealth growth potential of Whole Life with a mutual company - not to mention the tax benefits . So you should confer with an experienced Insurance Adviser who will be able to help you determine your needs and goals , answer questions about insurance companies you are considering , and help you to implement the best policy for you . One question you may find important to get the answer to is how the provider you 're considering handles policy loans . For some enlightening information on that topic please read the article at : WEBSITELINK
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
If you are considering term insurance please ask yourself these questions . How old am I ? If I buy 20 year term now how old will I be when I have to buy another policy ? Does it meet your needs to buy term life considering the objective of the policy ? The purpose of term has always been to allow the purchaser to invest the difference between the cost of term life and permanent coverage . How much are you `` investing '' now ? Every policy you have means you are paying `` administrative costs '' for that policy . What if you have one good size permanent policy purchased at your current age to meet all your life insurance needs or can you buy a term life and then be able to meet your financial objectives and not have to buy another life insurance policy ? Finally , you need to have a personal advisor that puts your needs first and has the integrity to make recommendations based on your TOTAL financial plan and not some life insurance agent pedaling life insurance
How much disbility insurance should you buy ? A combination of the most you can get and what you can afford . If you already have group insurance in place , usually you can only buy up to 70 % of yourwagescombined between individual and group . If group is not in place you can buy individual coverage up to 70 % and combine with group later to actually insure more than 100 % of your income . The hard part with how much coverage should you buy is how much will it cost ? Getting the full level of coverage can be pretty hefty as far as premium goes .
Nope . Life insurance can not be an investment . Think about this question for a second . What is the most essential element in an investment ? It is time . Some investments need time to mature . Other investments need time to increase in value . Example : if you are invested in the stock market , and your investment decreases in value , what should you do ? Should you sell ? Of course not . You would sustain the loss only if you redeem the shares at a lower price than when you bought them . What you should do is let them ride , and if properly managed , they should recoup their value , and then some . Over time . If you die , then you could pass this investment on to a family member , and that person could continue to manage the fund . It could continue to grow in value . Over time , during his or her lifetime . Does life insurance buy you this kind of time ? Absolutely not . The product is designed in just the opposite way . It assumes you will run out of time tomorrow . You get the biggest bang for the buck when a death benefit is paid immediately . Somebody could conceivably buy a policy today , pay one monthly premium , and then die . The beneficiary would receive the entire survivor benefit . Would you call something an investment if it required no time to realize value ? Nope . Or that is guaranteed to pay out , for that matter ? Lets talk about that guarantee for a second . Of all the forms of insurance you might buy , the only one you know for sure will pay a benefit is life insurance . This is because you know for sure you are going to die . You could buy medical insurance , but never get sick . You could buy disability insurance , but never get hurt . You could buy auto insurance , but never have a car accident . You could buy professional liability insurance , but never get sued . You could buy home insurance , but never have a fire . And on and on . However , if you hold on to that life insurance policy , you know your survivors will get paid . For sure . So , life insurance is a uniquely wonderful risk management tool that requires no time at all to realize value , and is absolutely guaranteed . With these characteristics , it meets nobodys definition of an investment . Now : I am sure you know that certain life insurance products can produce cash value . Whole life , universal life . Even term can carry a return of premium feature . But these funds are not to be considered investments . They should be seen as added value . As ways to partially offset your cost . As an extra benefit . They make the purchase of a policy extra attractive . But you should never assume that they will have time to grow . They will disappear as soon as a claim is filed and a benefit paid . And that could be tomorrow .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why should you buy life insurance ? Maybe you should n't . If no one depends on you for income , if you will have no final expenses to bury or cremate you , if you do n't care about the person that might be stuck paying off your debt , then , do n't buy life insurance . Also , people that do not believe in insurance should n't buy it . In spite of the fact that owning an insurance policy is not a religious commitment , buying it might disrupt their value system and enrich an already wealthy insurance agent or insurance company . On the other hand , if you do care about anything other than yourself at all , you should consider buying it . Even a small face amount of life insurance is better than having none . It might provide you with some peace of mind as the gurney you are bleeding to death on is being rolled into the surgical unit .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Pure Term Life insurance has premiums that increase every year as you get older . Most people do n't like a premium that goes up every year so they decide how long they need the insurance and level out the premiums by buying level premium term . When you do this you are paying extra in the earlier years in order to level out the premium in the later years of your level premium period . That is why 1-year term is much cheaper than 20-year term . When you buy term life insurance , you should determine how long you want the premium to be level and buy it for that length . For instance if your mortgage is paid off in 18-more years , you should buy a 20-year level term policy if the mortgage payoff is the reason for the insurance .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
At first I understood the question as Peggy did , then I saw Bob 's answer ... So I 'll address both concepts . Life insurance FOR children is a great idea and a great GIFT ! That is WHole Life - not Term . You can start a policy on a baby for $ 50,000 very inexpensively and by the time they are adult , the policy could well have doubled in face value and grown several thousands of dollars in cash value . That cash could be used for college , to buy a car , etc. . Then the policy could be turned over to the now adult child to continue as protection for their future family , etc. . The amount of Life insurance needed for yourself when you have children has many variables to consider when determining how much is enough . I always recommend to buy as much as you can afford . Again , Whole Life . There are tax advantages , cash value and other benefits that only come with Whole Life . If you also have a spouse in addition to the children you 'll want to consider how much it would take to replace your income . Is there a mortgage ? Do you want to pay for college for your kids ? These things and more should be considered when determining how much is needed . You 're best bet is to consult with an experienced Insurance Adviser to figure out what your needs are , and then to help you find the best company and policy to meet those needs .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Medicare Prescription Drug Plan Is Best ?
There is no universal `` best '' Part D prescription drug plan . You do want a plan though that `` best '' suits your needs and objectives . For instance , you want a plan that will provide coverage for prescription drugs that you are already taking , or might be expecting to take due to a condition you currently have . You can check this easily on the Medicare.gov website - Find health & drug plans , which will check a plan formulary -LRB- list of covered drugs -RRB- for you . You may also want a plan that uses a pharmacy network convenient for you , and a plan that optimally meets your budget and planned usage needs . While Medicare.gov provides the information and ability to enroll online , you may be better served to get assistance from a licensed insurance agent authorized to sell Part D plans .
Enrollment in a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan -LRB- Part D / PDP -RRB- is not mandatory . However , if you do not enroll in a Medicare approved Prescription Drug Plan , youll still need creditable prescription drug coverage to avoid a late enrollment penalty if you decide to enroll later on . To avoid the late enrollment penalty : Join a Medicare drug plan when you are first eligible and before your initial enrollment period is over . Dont allow 63 days or more in a row without a Medicare drug plan or other creditable prescription drug coverage . If you choose to delay getting a PDP plan , you are not penalized until you decide to enroll . This does come as a surprise to some people who choose to wait to buy a Medicare PDP plan after being on Medicare for some time . To calculate a late enrollment penalty fee , first determine how many months you went without creditable drug coverage . For example 43 months at a rate of $ 31.17 -LRB- 2013 -RRB- is 43 X .3117 = $ 13.40 . So , in addition to the monthly PDP premium , you would pay a $ 13.40 late enrollment penalty . You may have to pay this penalty for as long as you have a Medicare Prescription Drug Plan . In addition , the penalty rate may increase each year . This was a great question . I hope this answer was helpful .
Azilect is a medication that is covered under Medicare Part D -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- . You have to be enrolled in Original Medicare to get a Part D plan . You can also enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan -LRB- like an HMO or PPO -RRB- that includes Part D prescription drug coverage . Any drugs that are covered under Part B -LRB- Medical insurance -RRB- are ones that get administered in a doctor 's office -LRB- injections -RRB- , certain oral anti-cancer drugs , drugs used with some types of durable medical equipment -LRB- nebulizer or external infusion pump -RRB- . Sometimes drugs are covered under very limited circumstances -LRB- certain drugs in a hospital outpatient setting -RRB- . Since it falls under Part B , you pay the 20 % of Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . If you feel like you need help paying for your Medicare prescription drug costs , you can contact Social Security -LRB- 1-800-772-1213 -RRB- to apply for Extra Help . According to CMS , Extra Help is a `` Medicare program to help people with limited income and resources pay medicare prescription drug plan costs , like premiums , deductibles , and coinsurance . ''
It ultimately depends on what prescription drug plan you have . Not all drug plans are the same . The list of covered drugs -LRB- also known as a formulary for Medicare programs -RRB- will tell you whether your Cialis prescription will be covered . If it 's listed as a covered drug , then you would only pay your share of the expense -LRB- deductible , copay , and/or coinsurance , etc. -RRB- . If it 's not a covered drug , then you would be responsible for 100 % of the cost . It may simply be that the prescription drug plan you have does not cover this specific drug . \ At age 71 , I 'm assuming you 're on Medicare . If so , regardless of whether your drug coverage is under a Medicare Advantage plan or through a stand-alone Part D plan , you would not be able to make any changes to your drug coverage until the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15 - December 7 of each year -RRB- . During the annual enrollment period , you can evaluate your options to see which carrier 's plan will cover this prescription . If you 're covered under an employer plan , options may be limited , but if more than one option is available , I would recommend reviewing each of them to see which plan will be most suitable for your needs . If it 's an individual poilcy , I recommend contacting the agent who placed the covered for you -LRB- that person would be the servicing agent for the program -RRB- or call your insurance carrier directly to find out if it should be a covered drug under your plan . If you have a group policy , then you would need to either contact the carrier directly or your human resources department should be able to put you in contact with the appropriate person . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
As of June 1 , 2010 Medigap policies no longer can offer coverage for outpatient prescription drugs . Federal requlation requires that all Medicare beneficiaries have creditable prescription drug coverage . There are four ways to accomplish this : Drug coverage via an employer plan or retirement medical plan through a prior employer . Drug coverage via a Union retiree health plan . Veteran 's Administration -LRB- VA -RRB- drug coverage , available to certain veterans . A Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Plan . All the best to you . Mark
Adderall is a type of prescription and would therefore be covered under your health plan 's prescription drug coverage . Which tier level it may fall under can vary from plan-to-plan , meaning how much you pay for the prescription may be higher under some plans and lower under others . Tiers are generally broken down in to 4 or 5 categories - some combination of preferred generics , non-preferred generics , preferred brand-name drugs , non-preferred brand-name drugs , and specialty drugs -LRB- some plans classify preferred and non-preferred specialty drugs -RRB- . If you 're unsure , you can contact the carrier -LRB- or your agent -RRB- to find out if that specific prescription will be covered by your health plan and/or what portion of the expense they cover and what your portion of the expense would be -LRB- your copayment or coinsurance -RRB- .
Generally speaking , a Medigap policy will not cover prescription drugs . However , certain prescribed drugs covered under Medicare part B qualify for coverage under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs require enrollment into a part D prescription drug plan . I recommend locating a licensed agent specializing in Medicare/prescription drug plans to find the prescription plan the best suits your needs ...
Medicare Part D is the Medicare coverage designed specifically to cover the prescription drug needs of Medicare enrollees . There are a wide variety of Medicare Part D policies available from different insurance carriers and their costs , benefit structures , participating pharmacies and prescription formularies -LRB- the list of approved prescription drugs that they cover -RRB- do vary so you will want to shop around . Medicare Advantage plans , which are Medicare managed care plans , generally combine prescription drug coverage with their total package of benefits and so enrolling in a Medicare Advantage plan and taking out Medicare Part D coverage are mutually exclusive propositions .
I believe what you 're referring to is Plan E - it 's a Medicare supplement plan that used to be available in the Medigap marketplace - in short , it was a Medicare supplement plan that included prescription drug coverage . In June 2010 , rules regarding Medicare supplement plans were restructured and supplement plans could no longer include prescription drug coverage . Therefore , plans E , H , I , and J were no longer available for purchase . To get a similar plan structure today , you need to purchase either a plan F , G , or N -LRB- the most comparable Medigap plans to plan E -RRB- and a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . If you have an existing one that was already in force before the changes , you can keep it as Medicare supplement plans are guaranteed renewable .
Some Medigap Plans sold in the past did cover prescription drugs ; however , Medigap Policies sold after January 1 , 2006 are not allowed to include coverage for prescription drugs . Medigap Plans fill in the `` gaps '' that original Medicare does not cover . So it will pay for approved Medicare items . With that said , Medicare only covers a limited amount of drugs . Examples include : injections recieved in the doctor 's office , certain oral anti-cancer drugs , some types of drugs used with various durable medical equipment -LRB- ex : nebulizer or external infusion pump -RRB- , and under extremely limited circumstances , certain drugs you receive in a outpatient hospital setting . Some drugs in a hospital setting are known as `` self-administered drugs '' -LRB- drugs you normally take on your own -RRB- . These are not covered by Part B and , therefore , not paid for by your Medigap Plan .
Most Medicare Supplement plans do not include prescription coverage . Only some of the old , no longer offered plans include it . If prescription drug coverage is a concern , a stand alone prescription drug plan can be used as well as a Medicare Supplement policy . Another alternative may be a Medicare Advantage plan that includes drug coverage . Be sure to consult with an agent certified to represent Medicare Advantage plans . There are some significant differences between a supplemental plan and a Medicare Advantage plan .
For all intents and purposes , the answer is no . There are certain drugs , which must be prescribed , e.g. Cancer treatment drugs , that are covered under Medicare Part B. Drugs covered under Medicare Part B would also be covered under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs however are not covered by traditional Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- or Medigap supplemental insurance . An eligible Medicare beneficiary needs a Part D prescription drug plan in order to obtain drug coverage . You can enroll in a Part D plan at Medicare.gov , subject to certain enrollment period restrictions . As an alternative to a stand alone Part D plan , a beneficiary can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes Part D coverage -LRB- MAPD -RRB- . A beneficiary who enrolls in an MAPD can not have a Medigap policy or a stand alone Part D plan . It 's a good idea to find a licensed insurance agent who specializes in Medicare plans to review your needs and objectives and present you with optimal solutions .
Plan J is a Medicare supplement plan that used to be available in the Medigap marketplace - in short , it was a plan F that included prescription drug coverage . In June 2010 , rules regarding Medicare supplement plans were restructured and supplement plans could no longer include prescription drug coverage . Therefore , plans E , H , I , and J were no longer available for purchase . To get a similar plan structure today , you need to purchase a plan F and a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . If you have an existing one that was already in force before the changes , you can keep it as Medicare supplement plans are guaranteed renewable .
In short , Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- pay for approximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses - Part A is your hospital insurance and Part B is your physician insurance . The deductible for Part A in 2014 is $ 1,216 - $ 147 deductible for Part B . You are responsible for the other 20 % of your health care expenses . You can cover all or some of these expenses by securing a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- a.k.a. Medigap plan -RRB- or a Medicare advantage plan . You MUST keep paying your premiums for your Original Medicare coverage under either scenario . Please note , Original Medicare does not cover prescription drugs . If you want to add prescription drug coverage , you 'll need to secure either a Medicare Advantage plan that includes drug coverage -LRB- MAPD plan -RRB- or a separate stand-alone part D prescription plan .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
Medicare may cover some cancer drugs taken by mouth IF the same drug is available in an injectable form or is a prodrug . Xeloda is included this list . However , you will typically see these drugs covered under a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan - you would need to check your plan 's formulary to see if this specific drug is covered and at what tier it would fall under . You may want to check with Medicare directly to verify if your specific scenario would fall under the Part B coverage guidelines or if you would need to refer to your prescription drug coverage -LRB- i.e. Part D plan or MAPD plan -RRB- .
If you have a Medicare Part D -LRB- Prescription Drug Plan -RRB- , you should be able to call your Part D insurance company to find out which pharmacies are in your area that accept your Plan . Another way to find out which pharmacies accept your Medicare Part D plan is to visit medicare.gov and choose the tab that says Drug Coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- . Scroll to the bottom of the list and select Find Health and Drug Plans . You will now be on a page titled Medicare Plan Finder . Enter your zip code in the General Search box and click on the Find Plans button . You are now on a page that is Step 1 of 4 . Complete the appropriate information for the questions asked and click the Continue to Plan Results question . Step 2 of 4 asks you to enter your drugs . Youll need to enter the name of at least one drug . Once completed , you can submit the list and youll move to Step 3 : Select Your Pharmacies . The database will show you pharmacies in your area . You can change the range of miles within your zip code from 1 , 5 , 6 , and 8 . The database provides phone numbers for the pharmacies . It is in your best interest to call the pharmacy and make sure they accept your particular Medicare Part D plan before venturing out to fill your prescription .
Medicare prescription drug coverage is not mandatory , but it is very wise to have a plan if you 're on Medicare . Please note , if you do not get prescription drug coverage when you are first eligible for Medicare , you may be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you decide to purchase it in the future instead -LRB- the penalty can be waived in certain instances such as if you are coming off of group coverage -RRB- . A great , very popular Medicare coverage structure to have is original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- , a Medicare supplement plan -LRB- to cover the all or a portion of the gaps in original Medicare - 20 % of your health expenses -RRB- , and a standalone Part D plan to cover prescription drugs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare supplement program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part D is your prescription drug plan . It is administered by private insurance companies under the supervision of CMS -LRB- Medicare -RRB- . Medicare sets minimum requirements that all insurance companies must follow . The companies determine which drugs they will include in their Formulary of drugs that they will cover . When you select a prescription drug plan make sure that all of your drugs are covered . Even if you have to pay a little higher premium , the cost of certain drugs can often be far greater than the additional premium to have that drug covered .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is Title XVIII Medicare ?
Title XVIII Medicare is the national health insurance program in the United States for aged and disabled persons . It was established in 1965 . People pay into Medicare through taxes while they are working , then are able to receive the benefits at a very low cost when they turn age 65 , or are disabled for two years , or a few other circumstances .
Title XVIII Medicare is the national health insurance program in the United States for aged and disabled persons . It was established in 1965 . People pay into Medicare through taxes while they are working , then are able to receive the benefits at a very low cost when they turn age 65 , or are disabled for two years , or a few other circumstances .
Medicare began in 1965 under Title XVIII of the Social Security Act as a way of providing health benefits to the elderly . It was signed into law by the President Lyndon B. Johnson . The first Medicare card was issued to then past President Harry S. Truman , who was 81 years old at the time .
In 1965 , under the leadership of President Johnson , Congress created Medicare under Title XVIII of the WEBSITELINK to provide health insurance to people age 65 and older , regardless of income or medical history . Before Medicare 's creation , approximately 65 % of those over 65 had health insurance , with coverage often unavailable or unaffordable to the rest , because older adults paid more than three times as much for health insurance as younger people .
Title insurance is not homeowners insurance . Title insurance is what a Title company will take out to protect you and the Title companyin-casethe Title is not clean . Here is an example . You buy a house from John Doe . The Title company does there job and sees John Doe is the only owner and the sale and transfer of title is clean . However John had asisternamed Jane Doe that no one knew about who was also on title of the home and did not approve of the sale . What now ??? This is where title insurance would come in . Title Insurance would pay for any potential loss due to abotchedup deal . Usually the title insurance would pay off Jane to complete the sale since it was already finalized but there are several different ways this could go . I hope this helps to give you an idea of how title insurance works .
Home title insurance covers the expenses that could result if the title on your home is not clear . A `` non-clear '' title happens when older transfers of the title are done improperly or mistakenly . An example of being done improperly is when one person sells an entire property in fee simple , but he only owned fifty percent as a tenant-in-common . An example of being done mistakenly is recording a deed that fails to mention an easement . In order to resolve these issues you need to hire an attorney to go to court and clear the title . Title insurance will cover costs to clear the title .
Once a buyer and seller agree on a price , a title company normally begins the process of escrow . The purpose of this procedure is to legally transfer the property . In the process the title company makes sure that the seller has the right to sell the property to the buyer and that all liens against the property have been satisfied . When the title company is ready to transfer the deed to the buyer the title company then look to the buyer to make sure that the money for the sale is actually available . In most cases the purchase requires a mortgage . In their negotiations with the mortgage company the subject of homeowners insurance is opened . The mortgage company requires that a home for which they are going to loan money has enough insurance to protect their interest . This is compounded if there are multiple lenders . The way that this is normally done is that the buyer provides evidence of a homeowners policy that insures the house at the cost of replacement and names the mortgage company as the mortgagee . An agent normally draws up the homeowners policy at the direction of the mortgage company in coordination with the title company . When this is done in direct communications there are rarely any difficulties . The policy that is ordered has been pre-approved by the lender and the policy starts on the day that title changes , thanks to the title company . The term for loans where the owners equity is small normally requires that an escrow account be established . This escrow account pays the property taxes and insurance for the home . Money for the opening of the escrow account is a part of the closing costs . This means that the annual premium of the homeowners policy is paid when the title passes . The escrow account collects money throughout the year to enable it to pay the insurance company and the taxing authority when billed . This causes slight changes from time to time in the monthly payment that the mortgage company requires . The owner of the home can change insurance companies whenever he or she deems it appropriate . The amount of coverage is still subject to the requirements of the lender . Because the cost of constructing a house does not necessarily equal the price paid for a house this requirement is sometimes difficult to balance . When a change of policies is made the existing insurance company must be notified . Usually evidence of insurance provided by the newly appointed insurance company will satisfy the lender and the previous insurance company . This transition isnt always smooth and does require monitoring . Escrow withdrawals can be made to two insurance companies providing insurance on the same building . This presents many problems not the least of which is the fact that the cost for insurance has doubled . Most insurance companies will cancel a homeowners policy upon request . Most will cancel the policy effective the date of the replacement policy . Most companies will refund any unused premium on a pro rata basis . Some companies may use the short rate cancellation procedure . This procedure makes cancellation slightly more expensive .
Homeowners Insurance and Title Insurance are not the same . Title insurance is insurance to make sure the title of the home is clean . For example you are purchasing a home from Mr. Doe . The title company is to make sure all information is accurate such as who is the seller , boundaries are correct and so on . If you purchased the home from Mr. Doe and you find out later there also was a MS. Doe who says I never gave permission to sell the home now there is a problem and title insurance would step in to cover this situation . Homeowners insurance is what you purchase to cover your actual dwelling and property , liability etc. . . for a potential loss .
I believe that you can buy a home without title insurance . Title insurance is a service and a guarantee . The insurance provides that the title is clear . The title doesnt have any liens or obligations that havent been disclosed . An attorney can draw up the documents of sale and I believe that the attorney can do that without title insurance .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
This depends on how the home is titled . If it 's titled in both names then , yes , the insurance should be in both names . Most insurance companies do n't require both to be on the insurance but your mortgage company might . Th technical requirement follows the title . However it 's titled , that 's how the insurance needs to be written .
You will need to check your own individual homeowner 's policy . As a rule the ATVS must have it 's own policy . ATV 's are titled vehicles . The come from the manufacturer with a certificate of origin which you can take and have it titled . -LRB- just because a vehicle has a title does not make it street legal . -RRB- Most titled vehicles will need their own insurance coverage if you want to insure it .
If the title -LRB- proof of ownership ` in your name ' -RRB- is not in your name and you desire to register and insure the vehicle , you will need documentation of an insurable interest : lease agreement , etc. that a carrier will accept to underwrite a policy.Make sure you include all insurable interests on your policy - lessor as additional named insured for liability and named as loss payee for physical damage . If the vehickle is titled to another individual , many states allow you to obtain a signed authorization -LRB- a DMV form -RRB- in which the titled owner authorizes you to register and insure the vehicle . Again , make sure you can list the titled owner as an additional insured for liability and as a loss payee -LRB- along with any lienholder currently on the vehicle -RRB- . Make suire your state 's DMV will allow you to do what you want to do as far as the registration goes and then find as carrier that will underwrite the situation . A good agent or broker can assist you or you can act as your own broker and obtain insurance online . If you act as your own broker , good luck .
Vesting is done at the title level of a property . You may have on title the vesting rights on the deed which may include each owners names and rights . For example , two individuals may have equal vesting rights . The lender will ask the insurance company , or agent in most cases to list the vesting exactly as the title is written . Homeowners insurance simply duplicates the name on the insurance company to match the title and to offer the protection that needs to be afforded to the owners .
When you lease a car you do not hold the title so you are not the ` owner ' of the vehicle . Your lease may require you to provide insurance on the vehicle . Your policy -LRB- in your name -RRB- names the lessor as additional insured for liability coverages and loss payee for physical damasge coverages . If an individual holds title to the vehicle and you want to insure it , you will most likely have to register the vehicle in your name -LRB- a form from the state 's DMV authorizes this -RRB- and obtain insurance to cover your registration and plates . In this instance you would also name the individual title holder as additional insured for liability and loss payee for physical damage . If they have a lienholder on the vehicle you will have to include the lienholder as first loss payee and the individual as second loss payee . Chec k with a knowledgeable agent or broker who writes auto insurance for specific details . Your state 's DMV can also provide information . Maske sure an insurance carrier will underwrite the policy should you want to insure a vehicle you do not hold the title to .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Normally , insurance agents do not write title insurance . This is a specialty product that is written by licensed agents inside title companies . The price is not common knowledge however ; it is disclosed during the closing for a home . I dont believe that you have an option over the price . You do have an option over which Title Company will handle the closing . You might check with a realtor to determine if there is any difference in the price of their insurance and other services .
In California the key to auto insurance rates is who is on the title of the vehicle and where is the vehicle located . The way to pay the least is to live at home and have the parents on the title . They dont need to be the sole title holder but should be included as co-owner at a minimum . Your parents company might even reduce the premium if you leave the car at home when you go to college a long way away . I think you understand that as a single individual with little driving experience it will be difficult to obtain inexpensive auto insurance , because those kinds of drivers have more accidents than average .
Some of the items and services that Medicare does n't cover include : < a title = '' Services that include medical and non-medical care provided to people who are unable to perform basic activities of daily living , like dressing or bathing . Long-term supports and services can be provided at home , in the community , in assisted living , or in nursing homes . Individuals may need long-term supports and services at any age . Medicare and most health insurance plans do n't pay for long-term care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > Long-term care -LRB- also called < a title = '' Non-skilled personal care , like help with activities of daily living like bathing , dressing , eating , getting in or out of a bed or chair , moving around , and using the bathroom . It may also include the kind of health-related care that most people do themselves , like using eye drops . In most cases , Medicare does n't pay for custodial care . '' href = '' WEBSITELINK rel = `` nofollow '' > custodial care -RRB- Most dental care Eye examinations related to prescribing glasses Dentures Cosmetic surgery Acupuncture Hearing aids and exams for fitting them Routine foot care You can go to the medicare.gov website and check on the main page if any test , item or service is covered by Medicare .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Does Legal Expenses Cover On Home Insurance ?
In most policies this is a promise by the insurance company to pay up to the limit in the policy any amount of money for which you are liable because of bodily injury or property damage . There are limitations on this coverage and you should check your policy and confirm things with your agent . This coverage includes legal defense .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
what I think you mean by Legal cover is what we in the industry refered to as liability coverage . The reason it exists on a homeowners policy , is that it is protection most folks who own a home are at risk of needing . One develops an exposure typically by some form of negligence . So we in the US are empowered or constrained some by what we do that either creates a negligent action or by omission by creating a situation that by no action creates negligence.For example let me talk a bit about trees . Typically you can run the risk of causing harm to your neighbors if a tree on your property comes down on their house . In some states that would be viewed a negligent act in itself , but in other states you would have been required to have been warned by your neighbor of the potential danger in advance of the tree falling.Other mitigating factors will increase you propensity for being liable , such as the tree is dead . Those are some small ways we cause liability by some form of negligence.it may be easier to see negligence in driving but be assured there are many instances around a dwelling that can precipitate a legal liability for your self . Let me just give you a few to think about : your dog bites someone , a child secures a firearm and unintentionally shoots someone ; a visitor trips on the stairs you neglected to rid of ice , your son or daughter hits a baseball through a neighbors picture window , the child down the road jumps on your trampoline while you are not home , kids play in your pool without adequate supervision , your riding lawn runs over your neighbors foot . an on and on Keep a couple things in mind . Homeowners have coverage for various Perils -LRB- wind , hail snow etc -RRB- they all create hazards by the way the home is maintained , protected and secured . If you have a pool that is a creates a hazard of drowning . Without the pool there is little chance of drowning , so the hazards you create are ones for which there are often means to contain and yet the hazard still exist . You might have met the legal requirement to contain the space your pool occupies with a fence , but then negligently fail to lock the gate . so by your action or inaction you create scenarios for which you would be considered negligent and liable . The measure you should always use is what would a prudent responsible person do . If you follow that advise you may spend a few extra dollars , but you will avoid many unnecessary injuries and liabilities .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
Sure you can . Let 's say you live in NY -LRB- your legal address -RRB- and have a vehicle registered in NY . You can purchase NY Personal Auto Insurance in any state where the agent/broker is licensed in/for NY anmd represents a carrier that is licensed in NY to sell NY PAP and will accep -LSB- NY business from the agent or broker . I have n't purchased insurance online , but I would guess the online site asks for your information including state of registration , legal address , etc. . If you purchase online you are acting as your own insurance broker -LRB- lots of luck unless you are a student of insurance ... -RRB- Another situation is if you are a legal resident of NY and have a seasonal home in Florida . You desire to have a car in Florida and wish to insure it in Florida . I would recommend checking with a Florida agent or broker how to do this . -LRB- Insurance is regulated by state - there is not a countrywide standard . -RRB- Many insurance carriers require you be a legal resident of the state to purchase auto insurance for that state . Some may let you obtain a Florida registration and plate and issue you a Florida auto insurance policy using either your NY legal address or your Florida seasonal address . No ` one answer fits all ' for this question . Checking with the state 's DMV is also required to find out their criteria for registration application .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
No . A boyfriend or girlfriend does not meet the legal criteria for being considered an eligible dependent -LRB- you can imagine how complicated that could getin some people 's lives -RRB- . Legally married spouses are still generally considered eligible dependents though that coverage option is evolving rapidly due to a quirk in the health care reform law that does not define spouses as dependents . Natural born and step-children and individuals for which a person has a court order appointing them as legal guardian also qualify as dependents . I 'm afraid you 'll have to get married if you want to get covered under your boyfriend 's health insurance .
-- > Normal 0 Basic homeowners policies provide coverage in three general areas . They agree to indemnify you for the cost to repair or replace your home or your personal property should it be damaged or destroyed . They agree to indemnify you for your increased expenses should your home be damaged or destroyed and you are required to live somewhere else while your home is being repaired . They agree to provide you a legal defense and pay some or all of certain civil judgments should something you do or fail to do injure or damage someone . Obviously each area has its own limitations which are outlined in 40-50 pages of words some of which are subject to legal interpretations but for the most part this is the type of coverage you will find in most homeowners ' policies .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Only if you and your significant other are legally married . So , if it is a male/female relationship you are inquiring about then things are pretty straightforward from the marriage standpoint . If it is a same sex relationship you are inquiring about then things get more complicated . Same sex marriage is an issue that is still being addressed on a state by state basis . If your home state does not recognize same sex marriage and your employer is domiciled -LRB- incorporated in , established in -RRB- in such a state then you ca n't get married in that state anyways and an out-of-state marriage in a state that does recognize same sex marriage is not recognized in your home state . There is a tremendous amount of litigation going on in the Federal courts over this issue which makes it hard to be totally definitive when addressing this question . To make things even more interesting , you might work at a branch location of a company domiciled in a state that recognizes same sex marriage while your state of residence still does n't . And your employer 's policy may be to accept same sex spouses as dependents under their group health plan . This can result in the situation where one same sex couple -LRB- you still have to be married but I 've got some neighbors that went out of state to get married in a jurisdiction that does allow for same sex marriage even though our home state currently does not -RRB- may be able to take advantage of their employer 's health coverage while a similar same sex couple across the street who work for employers headquartered in states that do n't recognize same sex marriage ca n't cover their same sex spouse as a dependent . It is an interesting time to be in the employee benefits business .
Acts of God is a very vague term and really does n't come into play on a legal basis . Home insurance has two different main coverages . There is All risk and Named peril . All risk would cover anything that happens to your home unless specifically excluded . This is the most comprehensive form of home insurance . Named peril will cover those perils specifically named in your policy , Fire , Lightening , Wind , Hail etc. . Check with your agent to see what policy form you have .
life insurance claims are usually filed by the immediate family members , or benificiaries who are of legal age . When the policy is sold a folder is given along . with papers in order to identify where the policy information is kept . Depending . on the agent and company . Life policies are equivalent to wills are very involved in the estate . If you dealt with a good agent then you would have been assisted with this form of estate planning . The policy is mentioned in the will or there is a known location as to where the policy is kept . The claimants must be the beneficiaries of legal age . If the beneficiaries are under the legal age are named then the probate will handle the claim.until they become legal . It is always best to name a beneficiary of legal age if you have younger children for this reason . . Beneficiaries can be changed anytime during the policy and only by policy owner .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- cover some part-time home health services such as physical therapy , skilled nursing care , speech-language pathology servcies , etc. . Medicare does not pay for 24 hour home health care however , nor meals delivered to your home , personal care , and homemaker services . Please note , there are a number of conditions that must be met for Medicare to cover your home health care . If you need more than part-time/intermittent home care , Medicare will not cover the expenses . Home health care is very expensive and you can deplete your savings paying for it . For someone wanting 24-hour home health care to be covered by their insurance , they should look into securing a long-term care insurance policy . While long-term care can be an expensive type of insurance to have , you 're paying pennies on the dollar if you needed to make a claim on the coverage . There 's many moving parts to long-term care insurance . If you 're looking to secure this type of coverage , it 's most helpful to consult with an experienced broker to help build a policy that will best serve your needs . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
South Carolina Homeowners Insurance is similar to home insurance in any other State . You will need to have a good insurance policy to cover your home , personal belongings and personal liability coverage to protect you from legal action due to negligence . The home -LRB- dwelling -RRB- should be covered for the value to reconstruct the home following a total loss . Most insurance companies will simply ask you a few characteristic questions about your home and calculated the estimated reconstruction value of the home . Please note , the reconstruction value of the home is not relative to the current market sales price of the property which could fluctuate in differing market conditions and also includes the value of the land -LRB- which remains uninsured -RRB- . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
-- > Normal 0 Basic homeowners policies provide coverage in three general areas . They agree to indemnify you for some or all of the cost to repair or replace your home or your personal property should it be damaged or destroyed . They agree to indemnify you for some or all of your increased living expenses should your home be damaged or destroyed and you are required to live somewhere else while your home is being repaired . They agree to provide you a legal defense for certain civil actions should something you do or fail to do cause someone injury or damage and they will pay some or all of civil judgments should you be found responsible . How well you are reimbursed for these types of expenses depends on the specific policy you purchase , the premium you pay and the insurer you choose . You might also be interested in the Insurance Library responses to questions like What Should I Look For When Buying Home Insurance ? and How To Select Homeowners Insurance ?
First , I am not exactly sure what you mean by legal assistance , so I am going to answer the question I think you are asking . When you get car insurance you get coverage for injuring third parties , which is typically called bodily/physical injury coverage . Many times , this coverage includes defense costs in the event you get sued for injuring a third party . The limits of your legal defense costs can go one of two ways : either the defense limits are included within your limits or there is a separate limit for defense costs . There are advantages and disadvantages to either method . If the legal defense costs are included in your limits you will have defense costs until the insurance company pays out the limits of your insurance . If you have a separate limit then your legal defense ends when the attorneys fees use up that allocated amount . Either way you do n't have unlimited defense , but if it is a serious bodily injury you will lose the `` free '' attorney much quicker . I hope this helps !
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Aetna Cover Flu Shots ?
It depends on what specific policy you have . While many carriers ' policies cover flu shots , not every policy under a carrier does . You will need to verify with the carrier or your policy 's agent to see if it covers the flu shot at 100 % , partial coverage , or not at all . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Flu shots administered by CVS are typically covered by Medicare Part B as long as the person receiving the flu shot has not assigned his/her health benefits to an HMO -LRB- Health Maintenance Organization -RRB- . CVS is an approved Medicare provider of flu shots and the shot can be given right at the pharmacy location .
Medicare Part B typically covers flu shots during flu season . One per season is the standard coverage . Of course , you have to be on Medicare to receive the coverage . Your physician must accept assignment for providing the shot to you and the Part B deductible would not be applied . If your physician does not accept assignment , the flu shot is still free but you may have to pay a nominal charge for the doctor 's fee .
Most health insurance plans will cover preventive care , including flu shots . Some plans will have restrictions on immunizations and will only cover these shots if you are under age 6 . Optional immunizations for older children and adults may not be covered by your plan . Many plans will cover flu shots if you are in a high risk group . High risk individuals include children , elderly and those with compromised immune systems .
The shingles vaccine shot is generally covered under your prescription coverage . Medicare Part D stand-alone prescription drug plans generally cover vaccine shots needed to prevent illness such as the flu shot or shingles shot . Medicare Part A -LRB- your hospital insurance -RRB- and Part B -LRB- your physician insurance -RRB- do not cover the shingles vaccine shot .
It depends on what specific policy you have . While many carriers ' policies cover flu shots , not every policy under a carrier does . You will need to verify with the carrier or your policy 's agent to see if it covers the flu shot at 100 % , partial coverage , or not at all . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part B does not cover the shingles vaccine . It ` sgenerally covered under your prescription coverage . Medicare Part D stand-alone prescription drug plans will generally cover vaccine shots needed to prevent illness such as the flu shot or shingles shot . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Unfortunately no , Medicare Part B does not cover the shingles vaccine . This vaccine is generally covered under a Part D prescription drug plan - most Part D plans will cover vaccine shots needed to prevent illness such as the flu shot or shingles shot . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare will pay for the flu shot once per flu season -LRB- i.e. once per year -RRB- . Shots are offered starting in the fall , and the flu season in the United States is considered to run from October to May . Medicare will pay for flu shots from providers that accept Medicare assignment .
Medicare will cover vaccines and immunizations that help prevent influenza -LRB- the flu -RRB- , Pneumonia , and Hepatitis B -LRB- for those at risk -RRB- - you would generally not be not be subject to any deductible , coinsurance , or copayments if your provider accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . For doctors who do not accept assignment , they may charge you an excess charge - Medicare supplement plans F & G can cover these charges for you . Some other shots can be covered by Medicare for other situations such as getting bitten by a dog and receiving a rabies shot or stepping on a rusty nail and getting a tetanus shot . You would generally be looking at Part D coverage for other vaccines .
The Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- mandated many preventive benefits for adults and children , including flu shots . Typically , any deductible , copay or coinsurance is waived for qualified preventive benefits . This would apply to both individual and group medical plans . Before getting the shot , however , it is wise to quickly consult your agent/broker to verify your benefits for the specific shot you are receiving . If you do not currently have health insurance , you can easily and quickly purchase a plan from an experienced broker or a reputable health insurance website that offers free online quotes with no obligation . Exchange plans will not require any medical questions to be answered .
Medicare Part B covers certain doctor 's services , outpatient care , medical supplies including medical equipment , some preventative services such as flu shots , ambulance , mental health , and limited outpatient prescription drugs . There is a co-pay required for benefits received under Medicare Part B. Medicare supplement plans can cover the co-pay and pay for things that Medicare Part A and B do not cover .
Medicare Part A and Part B do not cover the shingles vaccine . The vaccine is covered under Part D , prescription drug coverage . Contact your drug plan to see what your co-pay would be for the shingles vaccine . Medicare Part B will cover a yearly flu shot and the pneumonia vaccine .
In my state and when Obamacare kicks in completely I believe all states will cover vaccinations as preventative care . Depending on your state , you may already have kids vaccinations covered in full and adults as well . I know that when I visit my doctor , each year I get a flu shot , it is covered 100 % by my plan .
Medicare Part B covers your doctors and outpatient services such as blood tests , X-Rays , MRI 's . and other outpatient testing . Part B also covers Durable Medical Equipment such as walkers , emergency service , flu shots , diabetic foot exams , Glaucoma testing , home health services -LRB- limited -RRB- , dialysis , and certain types of drugs in addition to an annual wellness exam . For a comprehensive answer see Medicare & You 2013 edition or go to Medicare.gov . You can also speak with a good agent specializing in Medicare and the needs of older adults .
Studies have indicated that employees with health insurance tend to have lower levels of absences from work due to illnesses . This is logical when you stop to think that an insured person has lower cost access to the health care system than an uninsured person does . Therefore , the insured employee is more likely to get annual physical exams , take advantage of preventive care treatment and screenings , or just do things like get a flu shot than their uninsured counterparts . These advantages extend to the employee 's insured dependents as well as parents may have to take off less to take their children or a spouse to the doctor . This is another reason that providing health insurance coverage to their employees is an advantage for employers .
Yes , Aetna 's Medicare Part D plans covers shingles vaccine . If you do not have a supplemental prescription drug plan or Medicare Advantage Plan , Medicare Part B does not cover the shingles vaccine , however . You must be sure to have your shot within your PPO , if specified , to save costs .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
Medicare does not cover the zoster vaccine . Zostavax -LRB- the common name for the vaccine -RRB- is for the shingles vaccine shot . Vaccine shots are covered under Part D prescription drug plans . You can use the plan finder tool on the Medicare.gov website to see what plans in your area will cover the vaccine shot .
Yes , Medicare does cover pneumococcal shots under Medicare Part B medical insurance . It 's always good to discuss with your health provider if you do need the shot since most individuals only need the shot once in their lifetime . You pay nothing if your health provider accepts payment in full from Medicare .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Lucrative Is Life Insurance Sales ?
Life insurance sales can be as lucrative as you make it . For myself , as a broker with 32 years of experience in the business , I was always a `` first in the office , last one to leave '' person . Typically , I have always been a good listener and make certain I know the products from the top insurers . Always explain details to customers and never ask them to buy a product . If they like your offer , they 'll let you know . Will this work for you ? Try it .
It is as lucrative as your financial connections or your work ethic . Commission sales people are cut out of certain bred of personality , more so with life insurance sales . The vast majority of life insurance sales people make $ 50,000 a year ; the upper middle class agent makes $ 100,000 . And the few affluent make over $ 250,000 a year like Court or Top of the Table industry recipients .
It all depends . Life Insurance sales is a business opportunity . First , you are compensated for writing policies that get issued . If you were to go out and write 10 policies today that all got issued you would get paid . Second you can get a varying contract with the Insurance carrier . That means that some will pay 70,80 90 % of the first years premium as a commission to you . Third , depending on your contract , you can get renewals . For business that stays on the books after 13 months , you can get a commission from that too . Fourth , if you get into management you can get commissions from what your sales teams write . It is one of the few professions remaining today where you dont need a college degree to earn a six figure income . You need to learn your products , market to people who want/need your product and sell them what they need . There are many good companies you can work for to receive the training and support to build a very good career out of this .
I have heard it said that the top life insurance sales people make more money than the top sales people in other industries . This could be true , because large commissions can run it to the millions of dollars . The life insurance business is an ideal environment for making it big . We sell a product that pays well . We represent strong and well established manufactures of this product -LRB- policies -RRB- . We dont have to maintain an inventory . We can develop sales organizations that dont require much labor or overhead . The demand for our services remains constant throughout the ups and downs of the economy . Of course , we have to pay our dues big time . We have to constantly strive to master our field and enhance our professional skills . We have to market , market , market , and then market some more . And we have to invest in every client prior to getting paid . To provide superior service , we need to provide a quote for a rate about which we are confident they will be approved . That can take many hours of work . And remember that life insurance has the most sophisticated and complicated set of eligibility requirements of all financial products . But at the end of the day we know we do outstanding work , and so we earn outstanding pay .
It is as lucrative as your financial connections or your work ethic . Commission sales people are cut out of certain bred of personality , more so with life insurance sales . The vast majority of life insurance sales people make $ 50,000 a year ; the upper middle class agent makes $ 100,000 . And the few affluent make over $ 250,000 a year like Court or Top of the Table industry recipients .
There are several steps that a retired person can take to increase their income . The first is to unretire . Retirement is overrated . Working has positive effects on a person and when the work is meaningful it can add years of enjoyment . It can certainly stretch your retirement budget . Even before you retire you can discuss this with your employer to determine if there is some way you can return to the workforce as either a consultant or contract worker . It would be best to determine which aspects of your work you enjoy and what type of projects you want to do . Enter into an agreement to work on those things that interest you . I know a teacher who shows up two periods of day to teach Physics and then gets in his car and drives home . He enjoys what he does and doesnt want to participate in the wider campus life . Sometimes it isnt possible to continue to work for your current employer . In those instances make an inventory of work in which you excel . Armed with that list contact people who need full or part-time help in your area of expertise and offer your services , or contract for your services . If you can not find an employer who needs your talents consider working for yourself . There are a variety of ways to advertise your skills and there are people looking for your talents . If you want to try something altogether new there are franchise opportunities available . These opportunities run the gamut from stores to on-line services and sales . Finding a program that suits your capabilities and temperament should be relatively easy . Some of these opportunities can become quite lucrative . I have clients who are leaving their employment long before retirement because their on-line sales business is flourishing . Obviously working provides income and it also reduces the number of years that you will depend upon your retirement savings to provide income . If you are drawing retirement income this will give you money which you can put into a Roth IRA to fund the period when you finally do stop working altogether . One of the most important things that working does is to allow you to delay receiving social security . For a long list of reasons it is usually to a retirees advantage to delay the start of benefits until they reach age 70 . The increase in benefits is substantial to the worker and to the widow it is amazing . Working provides a great deal of emotional satisfaction and a sense of freedom . Another technique to increase your retirement income is to tap into the equity of your home . Regardless of whether the mortgage is paid or not , you can take out a reverse mortgage after age 62 . A reverse mortgage will allow you to tap the equity in your home . This is a complex transaction and the only transaction that I can think of where an applicant must be counselled by a disinterested party . It is the right move for some , though and could make your retirement more comfortable . Another way to stretch your retirement dollars is to determine what you own of value that you no longer need . If what you own can be converted to cash it might help stretch your retirement income assets . Selling things on the internet is relatively inexpensive and can be quite fruitful . I advertised an accordion on the internet and was besieged with interested buyers . Estate sales demonstrate that there are things that are not being used by the retirees that are of interest to the public . Often cars are no longer being used , undeveloped land lies idle and jewelry lies unused in a safe deposit box . Another way to stretch your retirement income is to determine what services are available to seniors in your location that cost you money currently . Many places offer discounts and sometimes services can be free . Even utilities companies participate in programs to lower costs for seniors . With almost 50 % of retirees depending on Social Security for their retirement income it is very important to understand how you can stretch that income and even increase it .
Life insurance sales can be as lucrative as you make it . For myself , as a broker with 32 years of experience in the business , I was always a `` first in the office , last one to leave '' person . Typically , I have always been a good listener and make certain I know the products from the top insurers . Always explain details to customers and never ask them to buy a product . If they like your offer , they 'll let you know . Will this work for you ? Try it .
That is an excellent question ! Insurance agents do not draw paychecks like normal people . They are paid a portion of what policies they are able to sell , and that amount is called a `` commission '' . The amount of that commission will depend upon the agents ' contract with the company , and upon the product that has been sold . There are also small payments made annually called `` residuals '' that are paid when people keep their policies in force over the years . This income can be very lucrative , if you are a good salesperson , and are very active in your sales work . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Selling health insurance is lucrative but there is a price to pay . Personally , I have been a broker for more than 32 years . Helping thousands ofcustomersover the years has been very rewarding along with providing expert and unbiased advice . However , the hours are long -LRB- that 's my choice -RRB- and the work never gets done . Laws and plan benefits change so you must adapt .
For the right person selling life insurance can make for a great career . The key is figuring out if you 're the right person . Short of second or third generation insurance families , you wo n't find anyone who dreamed of being a life insurance agent as a child . As William wrote above , the statistics for success in life insurance sales are terrifyingly bad . However the ever increasing age of the average life insurance agent along with so few new agents entering the industry will present some great opportunities for young people who want to build a business . The demographics of the average life insurance agent are male , pale and stale . In other words , old white men . If the industry is to survive , and there is little doubt the industry will survive , those demographics have to change . There are two primary facets of a life insurance career . You need to be good at sales , and you need to know insurance . My experience is that the few people who do succeed in this business had a solid foundation in one of those camps starting out . A good salesperson has the ability to switch industries . If you have had some success selling cars or real estate or electronics , you will be able to sell life insurance . You will be able to learn the products and the industry as you go along and build a good career . If you have solid insurance industry experience but have never sold anything , you also have a better chance at success . Even if your experience is as a CSR in a P & C agency , you will pick up the life insurance side of the business quickly . You already speak insurance , now you just need to learn how to sell . But people who `` try out '' selling life insurance who have no sales experience and no insurance experience rarely succeed . It is just too difficult to learn the skill of selling at the same time you are trying to learn about insurance itself . So yes , life insurance sales is potentially a good career if you have sales experience . It is also potentially a good career if you have experience in some other facet of the insurance industry . If you do n't have either of those things , you will probably not find success in life insurance sales . Best of luck in your career !
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
While most of my career has been in online sales , Outlook Life has opened several storefronts , as well . I have found more success in online sales , but that may be because it suits my personality better . Most people make far better salespeople when meeting with their clients face to face . If you are considering online sales , here is an article I wrote about how to succeed in life insurance sales when operating from the internet . WEBSITELINK I will let the other outstanding agents on this website who run brick and mortar offices answer the question from that perspective .
You can make a ton of money selling life insurance . $ 1 million per year . More . A lot more . Of course , a number of factors have to fall into place . Here is my list of those factors that can fuel your propulsion toward making that kind of money : Dedicate yourself to selling life insurance . If you treat it as an ordinary job , then it wont be worth the aggravation . Treat it as the noble profession it is . There is virtue in making sure that the widows and orphans among us are self-sufficient , and dont have to ask for handouts . Commit to being the nicest person you can be . You are , after all , helping people face their own mortality . Be sensitive about that . Take a zen approach to selling : the sale you dont desire is the sale you will get . Should you want the sale ? Sure . Do you need the sale ? Sure . But perspective is essential . In the big scheme of things , this is only a sale . Dont get too attached to it . Become a true expert . Establish yourself as the go-to guy for this product . When somebody has a question about life insurance , your opinion should have the most authority . Specialize . Every other financial professional wants to be a jack of all trades and master of none . But let me ask you this : if you were willing to spend $ 100,000 on your own life insurance policy , would you hire a true specialist or at a mere generalist to get the job done right for you ? To drive home the point : lets suppose you wanted to spend $ 1 million on a new mansion . Would you hire a master builder , or a plumber that had also expanded into construction work ? Integrity , integrity , integrity . Your word should be gold . When you give somebody a quote , they should get approved at that rate . Period . View yourself as an elite producer . Why shouldnt you land a big fish on a regular basis ? If you really have put in the work to make yourself a master of your trade , then those big cases should come to you . Build a great organization . Make sure you can deliver superior service throughout every stage of the life insurance purchasing process . Open your own brokerage , or affiliate with good distributors . Or put together some hybrid of both . Lead a normal life . Too many salesmen divorce their wives and marry their business . Wrong priorities . And take the best care of yourself . Make yourself physically strong and mentally tough , and you will have the endurance needed to succeed . Big time . Ready - set - change . The world is shifting in all different directions . If you chart the right path , you can keep up with it . More than that , you can make it work for you . When I started in this business , I developed a local clientele . I saw every client personally , and was armed with a rate sheet and a few computer printouts . Two appointments , then a sale . All over the kitchen table or business counter . Now I do business across the country , and engage people through email , social media , and cell phones . Lots of ways to connect , to educate , to serve . Its taken some time to get used to the newest ways of doing business . But you know what ? If you let your traditional values guide you in your use of new technology , you will be a winner . Many times over . Just keep finding ways to keep the customer satisfied . Stay connected and build strong relationships . Keep educating , and keep serving . People should be able to find you on their desktop , on their laptop , and in their cell phone . Make it easy for them to tell you whats on their mind . To tell you their problems . So you can solve them . You will get many clients that way , and a lot of them will spend a lot of money on life insurance .
Title insurance is not homeowners insurance . Title insurance is what a Title company will take out to protect you and the Title companyin-casethe Title is not clean . Here is an example . You buy a house from John Doe . The Title company does there job and sees John Doe is the only owner and the sale and transfer of title is clean . However John had asisternamed Jane Doe that no one knew about who was also on title of the home and did not approve of the sale . What now ??? This is where title insurance would come in . Title Insurance would pay for any potential loss due to abotchedup deal . Usually the title insurance would pay off Jane to complete the sale since it was already finalized but there are several different ways this could go . I hope this helps to give you an idea of how title insurance works .
Perhaps this question is best answered by the statistical averages gathered over the years by LIMRA -LRB- Life Insurance and Market Research Association -RRB- : - Only about 7 % of agents that sign on with a single insurance company remain with that company past the first five years . - The percentage that remains in the business after departing from their first insurance carrier is around 20 % and each year that percentage declines . - About 3 % of all individual sales representatives that enter the insurance business remain in the business for 20 years or more . - The average age of a life insurance agent today is about 57 years old.It has been said that if you can sell life insurance , you can sell anything . As a career , being a life insurance agent can be very rewarding , but it is highly unlikely that life insurance will be the only line of insurance you sell unless you become highly specialized and work with other advising financial professionals as a team in the high-net worth market . Otherwise , you will find it necessary to sell other lines of insurance , notably health , DI , Annuities , LTCi , or property-casualty insurance -LRB- auto , home , liability , etc. -RRB- to pay the bills.Sometimes , insurance agents become securities-licensed and obtain various professional designations that allow them to practice financial advisory services and sales of stocks , bonds , and mutual funds . This is a fairly recent trend and usually results in the sale of life insurance being a rare occurrence due to all of the other responsibilities of being a financial advisor.Perhaps the most rewarding thing about being a life insurance agent -LRB- or being licensed to sell life insruance , among other things -RRB- is being the person that `` delivers the check '' to the survivors of someone that died prematurely and on whom there was a high level of financial dependence .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Life insurance sales can not be considered a job . Whatever the technicalities of your employment may be , you have to consider it as your own business . There are no set hours , no specified tasks to do every day , and no income unless you generate it . Life insurance sales can be a great career if you are self motivated and enjoy the business . If you are looking for a career or a way to build your own business you should look into it , if you are looking for a job life insurance sales is probably not for you . Good luck in whatever you do !
There is no Cooling Off Period for Property & Casualty Insurance ; Cooling Off Period is a safety feature for Life Insurance Products designed to allow the client the freedom to cancel the policy if insurance was purchased following a sales presentation . There have been many cases that people feel that they were pressured into the sale of life insurance product and therefore wish to cancel the policy.Home insurance is written on standardized forms thusregulating the actual coverage offered . Property & Casualty Products , including Home Insurance , are quoted and bound if the client decides to purchase coverage after reviewing the quote . A client may cancel the coverage at any time ; where the insurance company usually has 60 Days -LRB- varies in different States -RRB- to complete their underwriting investigation and take appropriate action . Insurance carriers will not allow the backdating cancellation of a policy unless there is a situation where duplicate insurance exists -LRB- proof will be required -RRB- or if the home has been sold at a prior date -LRB- the closing statement showing the sale date will be required -RRB- . For those seeking an online quotation , there is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
That is a great question ! And an interesting one . I guess the answer depends upon how long you 've had the policy , and how well you 've kept track of it ; or whether it is a good policy to get at all , if I 'm reading into your question rightly . Here 's what I advise people . A UL policy can be a good thing if you are somebody that keeps an eye on everything , and has extra money lying around . You also have to have a healthy risk tolerance . Agents will rightly tell you that this type of policy can bring great returns , but press them hard , and make them tell you exactly what stars and moons need to align for that to happen . What is the actual performance of the policy over time , not the best case scenario printed in the sales brochure ? How much over the minimum payment is required to achieve that performance ? That 's what you need to know if you are thinking of purchasing one . If you already have one , are you paying attention to how well it is still funded ? You could be in for a surprise if you have n't . Call your agent , and get an idea of how it 's doing for you , and how long you can expect it to be in force . Functionally , you can use the proceeds for everything that you would any other whole life insurance policy . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
When yuo speak of being `` medicare certified '' you are usually speaking of the fact that there are two classes of medicare sales people-those that sell medicare selling that is unregulated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services vs. those that do sell Medicare advantage . To be `` medicare certified '' you have to take the AHIP exam -LRB- American Health Insurance Portablity Act -RRB- . It is both time consuming and expensive . This year when I finally completed the certification I had 24 hours invested in just the recertification . Then CMS regulates Medicare Advantage sales people like we are crooks whereas the Medicare Supplement sales people are allowed to go unregulated . I assume you realize you have to have a valid insurance license for theState you reside in .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Eclipse Indexed Life Insurance ?
Eclipse Indexed Universal Life insurance is type of policy offered by Minnesota Life , a subsidiary of Securian Financial Group . Eclipse Indexed Universal Life , like most Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policies , provides for a death benefit while also allowing for the accumulation of cash based on fixed and indexed accounts .
Eclipse Indexed Universal Life insurance is type of policy offered by Minnesota Life , a subsidiary of Securian Financial Group . Eclipse Indexed Universal Life , like most Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policies , provides for a death benefit while also allowing for the accumulation of cash based on fixed and indexed accounts .
The easiest answer is to `` do something '' . Save something . If your employer does n't provide a 401K match , open up a Roth IRA and make regular , periodic deposits to the account . An IRA or non-qualified annuity are fine too . If you are in business and have no employees , open up a SEP -LRB- simplified employer pension -RRB- . All of the latter have limits to the contributions and eligibility . You should consider setting aside your retirement contribution before you spend on anything else . I suggest saving 10-20 % , with half of these funds liquid in demand savings accounts but only to the point you have enough on hand to equal 6 months of your living expenses . Then move more of the money into a tax preferred account until you max out your contribution limits . You can use life insurance as an asset accumulation vehicle as well and as you age you may be able to violate the TAMRA and turn the policies into modified endowment contracts that can become cash cows you fatten up for the future . Do n't forget variable and fixed index accounts , and mutual funds and stock index accounts . This should give you enough food for research but I 'd start with safe accounts and build out with an eye on avoiding the ravages of taxation until the government says you have met the limits of the tax preferenced acounts . Good luck . Oh , by the way , the longer you wait to start the harder it will be to accomplish money enough for retirement . I can prove mathematically that someone who starts today and maximizes their contributions for ten years can not be eclipsed by someone waiting for ten years and starting the same process even if you quit and all other factors are equal . It 's true , so , get started and good luck . You may be relying upon yourself more in retirement than you know today .
Eclipse Medicare is an extension to Medicare Australia 's online claiming solutions . The acronym stands for Electronic Claim Lodgment and Information Processing Service Environment . Eclipse provides a secure link between medical practices , hospitals , health funds , Medicare and the Department of Veterans Affairs . It allows in patient medical claims to be submitted and processed simultaneously with Medicare and private health funds , which in turn causes claims to be paid faster .
It is a universal life product that credits interest based on the performance of stock indexes . You are not buying the actual stocks or stock index so there is no market loss exposure . In good years you get some of the upside but in down years you get either no interest credited or something low and guaranteed e.g. 1 % . Most indexed universal life products use the most common index , the S&P 500 . A few products have been developed recently using indexes from around the world such as S&P 500 , Dow Jones , EURO STOX 50 , Hang Seng . Some use a more complex approach which blends them in a formula . Some blended index approaches weight the blend taking 75 % of the best and 25 % of the second best of the three selected over a time period e.g. one year on the belief that results over time should be better than a single index approach . Others are a more static formula e.g. Dow Jones industrial Avg -LRB- 35 % -RRB- , Barclays capital U.S. Aggregate Bond Index -LRB- 35 % -RRB- , Euro Stoxx 50 Index -LRB- 20 % -RRB- , Russell 2000 Index -LRB- 10 % -RRB- . The bottom line is that global index products attempt to find ways to reliably credit higher interest over time using averaging or weighted averaging . While we like the idea of these global blended products , we have a bias towards simpler index products that clients can better understand .
Yes , Indexed Universal Life Insurance works . If your goal is to build up cash value inside a life insurance policy that can offer financial flexibility later on , then it can work great . Universal life insurance accumulates cash inside the policy due to the success of a financial index such as the S&P 500 . Most companies give you choices of individual indexes or blends of several indexes and offer a `` floor '' of zero or 1 % . It is important to note that your money is NOT in the stock market . Interest is credited to your account if the referenced index goes up over a pre-selected length of time . Generally , insurance companies will put a cap on the amount of upside you can get because they are guaranteeing you no downside if the index goes down . Often , the caps can be 13 % - 17 % with blended index choices . Make sure you set reasonable expectations for what `` success '' is , though . Building significant cash value inside an indexed universal life insurance policy does n't happen over night . You should allow 10 to 15 years for accumulation for college education costs or a retirement income stream . And remember , even if you use the available cash build-up over the years , you still have the death benefit to pass on to your family upon your passing . As always , it is all about `` fit '' when it comes to financial products and Indexed Universal Life is no different . The design of the IUL is important and best left in the hands of an experienced , licensed financial professional .
Global Index Universal Life Insurance is IUL that offers interest crediting based on an equity index strategy option that includes foreign stock market indexes in addition to US stock marked indexes . Non US indexes commonly used are the EuroSTOXX 50 Index -LRB- Western Europe -RRB- and the Hang Seng Index -LRB- Hong Kong -RRB- . Depending on the Global Index Universal Life product , it usually offers the choices of a fixed interest strategy , an indexed strategy , or a combination of the two . The features of IUL that attracts consumers is the potential to accumulate higher than normal cash values through their ability to take advantage of the upside potential of the market . Yet there is a 0 % floor that helps protect them against downside risks .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
Fixed Index Annuities -LRB- FIA 's -RRB- are annuities that have the security of a guaranteed interest rate along with the potential to earn more based on the performance of a market index or indexes . Fixed Index Annuities are often interchanged with the term Equity Indexed Annuities , but FIA 's can be tied to indexes other than the stock market . The premium for a Fixed Index Annuity can go in as a simply payment or be paid over time . The potential for growth in an Indexed Annuity is greater than a Fixed Annuity due to the participation in the indexes . However , it maintains the security of the guaranteed interest rate of a Fixed Annuity .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
Lesson One A Simple Lesson on How the S&P 500 Works -LRB- Since the AP Has No Clue -RRB- Oct. 4 , 2010 4:34 AM ET | 15 comments | About : SPDR S&P 500 Trust ETF -LRB- SPY -RRB- , IVV , VOO , SSO , SH , SDS For More Info contact I came across this disaster of a story from the Associated Press yesterday : `` Apple May Surpass Exxon As Most Valuable Company . '' Interesting - Apple -LRB- AAPL -RRB- is a monster - but I did n't expect the AP -LRB- that 's Associated Press , not to be confused with AAPL -RRB- to attempt to mis-educate their vast audience with this blatantly false nonsense that shows a thorough lack of understanding of how the SPX works : While Apple CEO Steve Jobs will no doubt be happy about his new perch atop the business world , there 's more at stake here than mere bragging rights . As soon as the total value of the company 's shares edges above Exxon 's , Apple will take over the top spot in the Standard and Poor 's 500 , the market index used by most professional money managers . That means that billions of dollars invested in funds that track the index will have to shift their holdings to reflect Apple 's new weighting . Exxon , meanwhile , may see its share price fall from the same effect . That slide could be accelerated by hedge funds and technical traders who make bets based on the rebalancing of major indexes and would be primed to short the shares of Exxon . '' Reminder : The S&P 500 is a market cap weighted index . That means that larger companies have a higher weight in the index . An S&P 500 index fund will own a certain percentage of the outstanding shares of each company . It does n't take a market expert to understand that when Apple 's share price rises , and its market cap rises , its value in your S&P 500 portfolio also rises ! As an S&P indexer , you do n't have to do a thing . Changes in market cap based on share price movement are automatically self adjusting - after all , market cap = share price x shares outstanding . On a quarterly basis , the S&P 500 rebalances its index based on new share issuance and buybacks -LRB- in other words , changes in shares outstanding -RRB- . For example , when Exxon -LRB- XOM -RRB- buys back shares , S&P 500 indexers will need to sell shares of XOM . If XOM does a secondary offering , indexers will need to buy shares of XOM . So if you own one you need to relax it corrects automatic so you need not worry .
Global index universal life is generally defined by the use and performance of multiple indexes , domestic and foreign , within a current assumption universal life policy . The crediting period may vary from one to five years . As a three index example : the best performance of the top two indexes are credited to the account , one company credits 75 % of the leading index and 25 % of the second performing index and then eliminates the lowest index altogether . Keep in mind that policy expenses are deducted every year and in a year that all three indexes are negative , the policy would be negative . So you could lose money .
First and foremost , the objective is of life insurance is to provide valuable death benefit protection . If you 're looking at taxable investments to help secure your retirement years , your life insurance professional can show you ways to use the tax-advantages and growth potential of cash value life insurance . A properly designed life insurance policy can provide : Death benefit protection No income limits - unlike with 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s , traditional IRAs , or Roth IRAs Tax-advantaged cash value growth potential Supplemental retirement cash flow through tax-advantaged loans and/or withdrawals of policy values Cash flow that will not increase your overall tax expense or cost of government programs like Social Security and Medicare The key to the cash value and income features is how cash values grow . The index feature provides the opportunity to have the policy value allocated between Indexed Accounts and a Fixed Account . The Indexed Accounts are eligible for Indexed Interest which is non-guaranteed interest based on fluctuation in a stock price index such as the S&P 500 that may be credited to the Indexed Accounts at the end of each segment year . The interest rate for all accounts will have a guarantee to never go below some minimum rate such as 1 % annually . This approach is a good idea and may be something to consider . A life insurance professional can help determine if it fits with your objectives .
If by `` investment '' , you mean something that may gain or lose value , then the only type of life insurance that I would consider an investment is Variable Universal Life -LRB- VUL -RRB- . The interest credited to a VUL policy is based on stocks & bonds and may be positive or negative for the year . There are other types of life insurance that can accumulate cash called whole life and universal life policies . I consider these savings vehicles rather than investment vehicles because they do not lose money due to a decrease in the stock market or index . Whole Life insurance accumulates cash by dividends that are declared by the life insurance company . Universal life , other than VUL , comes in a fixed and an indexed universal life option . The Fixed UL earns interest based on a rate declared by the insurance company . The Indexed option -LRB- IUL -RRB- earns interest based on the performance of an index such as the S & P. With an IUL , there is usually a floor of 0 - 2 % that protects the cash value if the index is negative . The nice thing about an IUL is that you participate in the upside of the market without the downside risk . These are complex products and it is important to speak with a knowledgeable advisor who can educate you on the fees and other particulars .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Permanent life insurance is NOT bad ! There are a number of different types of `` permanent '' life insurance and some are better than others depending on your goals and needs . What is bad is when sales people misrepresent the policy they are selling ! Permanent insurance includes Whole Life , Universal Life , and the variations of Universal such as Indexed , variable and variable indexed . Variable basically means that it 's tied to the stock market . Indexed basically means that it 's tied to a particular `` index '' such as the S&P 500 . Whole Life is the only one with Guaranteed Premiums , Cash Value growth and Death Benefit with no downside risk .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Equity Indexed Annuities is a slight misnomer for indexed annuities . Non-qualified indexed annuities generate earnings from indices both foreign and domestic with crediting methods like rate caps , spreads and participation rates -LRB- sometimes a combination . -RRB- Most indexed annuities use index options funded by their interest rate portfolio yield .
Fixed annuities have fixed rate of returns credit once every year on your anniversary date . It is compounded normally daily . Then their are fixed index annuities that offer a fixed rate of return or one that is indexed to the indexes such as the Dow Jones or Nasdaq and several other indexes each insurance company has its own twist on its offering of index plans
The word `` equity '' tends to lead to a bit of confusion in the definition . An equity indexed annuity is not actually invested in the stock market . An index such as the S&P 500 would be referenced over a specified period of time -LRB- such as one year -RRB- and if the index has increased in value , your annuity would be credited interest . One of the advantages of an indexed annuity is that if the referenced index declines over any year , you would not lose any value as a result . You would simply not be credited with interest for that year .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Where Can I Buy Renters Insurance Online ?
Renters Insurance can be purchased Online ! Renters Insurance is designed to protect tenants from financial loss due to damage or theft of Personal Property and protection from cases of Personal Liability . In order to obtain a quick and free quote for renters insurance , you will need to state the amount of personal property coverage you desire , the personal liability limit and the deductible for the policy . If shopping for the cheapest possible premium , you should request the minimum amount of personal contents coverage that is acceptable to you , the lowest limit of personal liability -LRB- $ 100,000 -RRB- and the highest available deductible . Once you have the rate quote , you can proceed with the purchase of your renters insurance policy . The link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States may be used directly by Consumers . WEBSITELINK
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
Where we may find it difficult to define ` Best ' Renters Insurance ; we believe the best renters insurance would be the most comprehensive coverage for a competitive premium rate . We believe in most States , this coverage lies in the hands of Renters Insurance Online available through Stillwater Insurance Group . We have an Online Link for consumers to obtain a quote , choose options and purchase the insurance policy online . If the definition of ` Best ' is ` Cheapest ' ; the easiest method to generate a Cheap Renters Insurance quote is to select a low amount of coverage with a high deductible . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States at : WEBSITELINK
If you are looking for Cheap Renters Insurance , Renters Insurance is very inexpensive . The best way to purchase Renters Insurance Online is to request the lowest Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- Coverage needed , the minimum Personal Liability Coverage needed and the highest deductible that you can afford ; this will provide the cheapest quote . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be useddirectly by Consumers . A great way to buy renters insurance online ! WEBSITELINK
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Cheap Renters Insurance is available online ! In order to obtain the cheapest renters insurance , you would need to select the lowest available personal property coverage , the lowest available personal liability limit and the highest available deductible . For those mandated by contract to carry renters insurance and are not interested in purchasing renters insurance , this would be the cheapest way to go ! There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be useddirectly by customers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance is also known as Tenants Insurance , it is a basic policy form offered by most insurers designed to provide contents coverage and liability protection in the event someone becomes injured at the residence . Renters Insurance has 2 sections of coverage ; the first covers the Personal Property Coverage and the second section covers the Liability and Medical Payments Coverage . Policies have various deductible options available ; the deductible only applies to the first section of the policy . The deductible is the amount deducted from the total amount payable to the insured in the event of a claim.It is important to note that insurance premium rises with a lower deductible and insurance premium is reduced with a higher deductible . This should be an important factor during the process of seeking Renters Insurance . Renters Insurance is usually less expensive than most people may think , a basic renters policy may cost between $ 150 $ 300 per year depending on geographic location and amount of coverage selected . Since consumers are increasingly wishing to handle business online , we have devised an online platform available to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly by Consumers . This technology provides an exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It is important to contact a licensed professional to assure that any unanswered questions are satisfied .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance can be purchased Online ! Renters Insurance is designed to protect tenants from financial loss due to damage or theft of Personal Property and protection from cases of Personal Liability . In order to obtain a quick and free quote for renters insurance , you will need to state the amount of personal property coverage you desire , the personal liability limit and the deductible for the policy . If shopping for the cheapest possible premium , you should request the minimum amount of personal contents coverage that is acceptable to you , the lowest limit of personal liability -LRB- $ 100,000 -RRB- and the highest available deductible . Once you have the rate quote , you can proceed with the purchase of your renters insurance policy . The link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States may be used directly by Consumers . WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance can not be transferred from one tenant to another tenant ; the named insured can not transfer the insurance to another person . However , if the named insured moves to a new rental location , the location can be changed by request to the Carrier 's Customer Service department in writing or online -LRB- if available -RRB- . If the named insured is moving to another State , the policy will need to be rewritten as policy forms are approved separately by each independent State thus requiring a rewrite to the new State . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States should you be unable to make a change to your current renters insurance policy based on your current situation . An exemplary online solution for all ! WEBSITELINK Should you need additional assistance , please contact a licensed professional to answer your specific questions !
There are many ways to purchase renters insurance online . Most major insurance companies will allow you to purchase directly thorugh their websites . There are also websites that give you access to many different companies at once . However , there are some things that concern me about purchasing insurance online . As a former agent for a top 3 insurance company , I would become the `` agent '' for individuals who had purchased their own insurance online . I consistently found problems and lack of coverage when I recevied these clients . My recommendation is to reach out to a local independent agent and tell them you are looking for renters insurance . This will give you the opportunity to build a relationship with that person and have them make recommendations for certain coverages . There are many additional coverages that are available on renters policies from water back-up , to identity theft coverage , and specific coverage for jewelry , collectibles , music equipment , etc. . It is best to discuss these options with a professional so you know exatly what is covered and how it is covered . While you can quickly purchase renters insurance online , you may leave yourself with gaps in coverage , which can become costly in the event of a claim . The process is not that much slower within an agency -LRB- we frequently put polices in place the same day -RRB- and you can be confident that you have the proper coverages . If you do not feel comfortable with the agent you are in contact with , ask friends and family who they work with and find someone you truly trust . Even though you are purchasing a fairly inexpensive renters policy , take your time to find the right solution for you . In the unfortunate event of a claim , you will be happy that you did .
Yes you can apply for life insurance online . The life insurance industry is going through a very trying transition right now . The average career life insurance agent right now is over 50 years of age and the total number of agents is quickly declining . This is happening because more people like you are looking for life insurance online . The important thing for anyone who is a just starting the life insurance process to consider is that your buying experience will certainly be very different if you buy life insurance online versus contacting a local agent . Not better or worse , but different . Thinking about how you prefer to do business may help you decide which route to take . Are you part of the connected generation ? If your average day includes texting and Skype or FaceTime you will be perfectly comfortable buying your life insurance online . Do n't be concerned that you will be stuck with some impersonal call center . There are plenty of great online insurance agents that provide personal service . The only difference between them and your local agent is that your communication will be via your smart phone , not in person . If you 're not into the latest technology and you feel that personal interaction requires a handshake , you probably wo n't be comfortable getting life insurance online . You may find the process cold and impersonal . Do n't worry . Even though they 're getting older , there are plenty of great local life insurance agents that will give you advice and personal service your way . Many of them still make house calls and transact business over your kitchen table . The most important thing is not where you get life insurance , it 's that you do get life insurance . Good luck to you whichever route you choose :-RRB-
In order to know how much Renters Insurance will cost you monthly , you 'll need to obtain a renters insurance quote . If you seek the lowest premium you will need to purchase the minimum amount of personal property coverage , the minimum personal liability and the maximum deductible available ; this will generate the lowest premium quote . In order to provide an online renters insurance quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; a link is available that may be useddirectly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK Please review all coverage details prior to purchasing any insurance policy .
In order to buy Cheap Renters Insurance , it is helpful to understand your needs , desires and the rating structure of the Renters Insurance Policy . The lowest annual premium will be generated for the minimum Contents Coverage -LRB- Personal Property -RRB- available , the minimum Personal Liability Coverage -LRB- Usually $ 100,000 -RRB- and the maximum available Policy Deductible -LRB- varies from State to State -RRB- . If all 3 of the above items are met , you will generate the lowest premium quote possible . If the Renters Policy is required by a Landlord and you are not purchasing it on your own accord , it may be helpful to find out if the Landlord is requiring to be added to the policy as an ` Additional Insured ' and if so , it would be prudent to find out exactly how they would like their Name & Address to read on the policy endorsement . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be used directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If unclear about coverage , it is prudent to contact a licensed professional to answer your questions and assist you in purchasing the coverage you need .
Travelers Insurance Company has an excellent renters insurance policy . The Form HO-4 covers Personal Property and Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant -LRB- insured -RRB- . Renters Insurance is a very valuable coverage because it no only offers protection against damage to your personal property but also protection against negligence and personal liability cases that may be brought against you . One valuable example is if there is fire , smoke or water damage to the rented home or apartment unit , the property owner 's insurance company will most likely attempt to collect damages from the tenant if they can prove negligence . In this case , Renters Insurance will provide the legal representation to handle the situation although the policy limit will apply . If you are not sure and do n't really want to commit to purchase renters insurance but may or may not be required to according to your lease agreement , the best way to generate the lowest annual premium is to select the minimum personal property coverage available , the lowest limit of personal liability and the highest available deductible for the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Stillwater Insurance Company has the Best Renters Insurance Rates in most States and most geographic areas . PersonalProperty coverage is available up to $ 300,000 , the minimum available limit of personal property is $ 10,000 for all states , with exception to CA and NM where it is $ 15,000 and FL where the minimum limit is $ 25,000 . Live in partners , such as a boy-friend/girl-friend , areaccepted on the same policy and both partners may be listed as Named or AdditionalNamed Insured . Two immediate family memberts -LRB- adult siblings or parent/adult child -RRB- are accepted on the same policy ; if more than two reside in the household , each would need their own policy . Spouses on one policy are always acceptable , but each adult child would need their own policy . Townhomes/Condos that are located over a store/commercial location/business are allowed . Actual business foot-traffic in the insured property is not allowed . AProperty Management Company of a home or apartment complex may be added as a Certificateholder under the additional interest option on the policy . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be useddirectly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance covers the Personal Property of the Insured Tenant , offers Loss of Use for a covered hazard and provides Personal Liability for the Insured Tenant and resident family . The Renters Insurance Policy is commonly known as a Form HO4 and is available in all States . Renters Insurance is mandatory in a few States where the Government has been faced with an unusually high number of law suits thus inundating the legal system ; in other States , you will find some Landlords require tenants to purchase the insurance to provide a layer of protection for the possible negligent acts of a tenant causing property damage to the building , property of other tenants or inadvertent bodily injury to others . The possession of Renters Insurance is a display of genuine responsibility for one 's personal property and protection for others . Renters Insurance Online is available online in multiple States at the following link : WEBSITELINK In order to produce a lower premium , it is recommended only to purchase the minimum amount of Personal Contents coverage to sufficiently replace the personal property of the insured and to select a high deductible . This combination will generate a comparatively lower premium ; renters insurance is written for an annual term and is fairly inexpensive .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
If you wish to avoid a sales pitch and would rather take your time and utilize a Self Service Insurance portal , you may proceed to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online . If however , you would prefer to visit a retail agent and deal with a person directly , you may wish to contact Farmers , State Farm or Allstate and find your local agent who will be happy to make an appointment and answer your questions directly . The following link will provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
If you decide to buy life insurance online , let me clarify one important point about the cost . Whether you go to my website , any other insurance website , or meet with any agent in the country , the price for a particular insurance policy will be the exact same , regardless of where you buy it . Life insurance premiums are fixed by the insurance company and no one is given preferential pricing . I think it can be helpful to do some initial research online , but it is of utmost importance to discuss your particular situation with a knowledgeable agent . You can run insurance quotes on many websites , but the cost is only an estimate until the insurance company approves your rate class and the policy . I have seen several instances where someone sees a low price , goes through the application process , and gets a different rating than they applied for . Then the premium is much more expensive than what they first saw . This could have been prevented by speaking with an agent first who can do some preliminary underwriting and guide that client toward a company that will offer the highest rating and lowest premium for their unique circumstances . My advice for purchasing life insurance online would be to work with a knowledgeable advisor who can help you sort through the many options . The price will be the same and the advice and guidance will be free .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Does Renters Insurance Work ?
Renters insurance funtions in many ways much the same as homeowners insurance . This type of policy will provide the insured with liability coverage and personal property coverage . Contact a local agent to discuss your concerns about coverage and they should be able to describe the coverage in detail to help you understand the coverage .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
Renters insurance protects the landlord in the sense that it can provide extra liability protection A renters policy is taken out by the renter to cover the renters possessions . It does not cover the dwelling or items owned by the landlord . If however a renter is negligent and someone is injured on the property , the renters insurance will provide protection from lawsuit .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
The difference between Renter 's Insurance , Condo Owner 's Insurance & even Homeowner 's lies in the insurable interest . A renter 's policy is going to cover personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but not any building coverage ... since the renter does not own the building , they do not typically have an insurable interest . However , in some cases , there have been leases that require the tenant to pay for the insurance and taxes - these are called triple net leases . The renter in these cases may have to purchase coverage for the building rented -LRB- usually a home -RRB- . Condos almost always have a condo association . The condo association covenants determine how the condo should be covered . Some associations only cover the exterior walls , leaving the condo owner to cover everything attached to the building including what 's between the drywall/sheetrock & exterior . Some associations cover everything up to the drywall/sheetrock , while others even include anything attached to the drywall/sheetrock including cabinets , etc. . On occasion , the condo association can assess a property deductible to each individual condo for $ 10,000 ; in which case you would want to make sure that amount is added to the your policy . In each case , whether renter 's insurance or condo insurance , make sure you obtain the lease or covenants and make sure you do n't have any `` holes '' in your coverage !
Renters insurance is probably the single most affordable insurance on the market that delivers the most coverage . Renters insurance premiums are low because insurance carriers have a positive loss experience with renters polices . Also renters polices are not insuring dwellings so there is a difference in that respect . The liability alone that you get from a renters insurance policy is worth the price you pay . There really is no excuse to not have renters insurance but unfortunately to many people get caught without this coverage and suffer the ramifications of a loss . I have known clients who refused to buy renters insurance because they believed nothing would happen to them just to see them suffer a heavy loss and all to save a few dollars . There is also a great and common misconception that that landlord will cover the loss . This is absolutely not true .
I agree with the coverage part of answer one , however , if your renters insurance is only $ 10 a month I would question how much coverage you are actually getting . Why pay for something that will not protect you when something actually does happen ? Questions to ask your agent are : what they are basing their recommended coverage amount on ; if your property is covered only if it is inside your home -LRB- some companies offer world wide protection - if you 're on vacation and the airline loses your luggage for instance -RRB- ; how any valuable items such as jewelry or art , are protected - they should be scheduled on your renters policy otherwise they are only protected up to certain limits . And yes definitely look into bundling renters and auto for an additional discount !
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
Renters Insurance is an essential form of liability protection for renters that are concerned about protecting themselves from the result of what could be perceived as a negligent act . For example , there could be a smoke damage claim , a fire claim , a water damage claim or perhaps a slip & fall involving neglgence . The Landlord and in the case of an apartment , other tenants , could bring legal action against a renter . The only form of protection in such a case would be liability insurance provided as a section of your Renters Insurance . In some States and jurisdictions , Renters Insurance is a requirement on all lease agreements -LRB- standard -RRB- due to the court system being inundated with unnecessary law suits which could be settled by insurance . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive ; if one does n't wish to cover their own personal belongings , they could purchase only the minimum Personal Contents requirement but it would be recommended to purchase the maximum amount of Liability Insurance which in many cases would only be approximately $ 25 - $ 50 difference per year . For quotes in CA , AZ or NV , you may obtain a quote at the following link : WEBSITELINK
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
There is no deductible on Section II of your Renters Insurance Policy ; Section II applies to Personal Liability and Medical Payments to Others , both of which do not require a deductible . If you are purchasing Renters Insurance primarily to provide Personal Liability coverage required by your landlord or simply for the personal protection of your assets from a liability exposure , you will be best served by purchasing a policy with the maximum available deductible . The lowest renters insurance policy premium will be generated by selecting the maximum deductible amount on the policy ; however , the deductible only applies to the Personal Contents -LRB- physical loss -RRB- . It is important to review your policy as there are variations from State to State ; however , Renters Insurance is referred to as a Homeowners Form HO-4 or Renters Form . In most geographic areas , Stillwater Insurance generates the lowest premium for this type of coverage and the policy is available online . You may obtain a Free Renters Insurance Quote and Buy your Renters Insurance Policy Online at : WEBSITELINK Stillwater Insurance , formerly Fidelity National Insurance Group , is an admitted carrier , authorized and licensed in all 50 States .
Yes an apartment complex can require you to obtain renters insurance as a condition of renting their apartment . What apartments are concerned about is liability protection . Should the tenant be liable for bodily injury or property damage the apartment complex does not want to be the first in line to be sued for something the tenant caused . Instead the tenants renters insurance policy will defend against the loss first . The apartment complex will not care if you chose to carry coverage for your own personal property . Also on a side note if the tenant did not carry renters insurance and was sued for a loss , just because the apartment complex may have to defend does not give a free pass to the tenant . Your still going to court and it can cost you thousands . Renters insurance is very inexpensive and covers you for so much . Buy it .
end question
start question
annuities
Who Governs Annuities ?
If youre asking about all annuities , then here are two governing bodies for variable annuities : FINRA and the Department of Insurance . Variable products like variable annuities are registered products and come under the oversight of FINRAs jurisdiction . But because it is an annuity insurance product as well it falls under the department of insurance . Non FINRA annuities are governed by the Department of Insurance in each state .
Boy , what a question . For me , it gets to the root of what is wrong with government these days . Im going to speak bluntly because I feel very strongly about this issue . Even though I sell life insurance for a living , I have had extensive experience in the medical insurance marketplace . I am also a consumer , and have to buy the product for myself and my family . And , I am a patriotic American who wants to see our country run the way it should be . Everybody needs medical care . If the insurance marketplace is left to run by its own devices , the vast majority of people will end up with a product that they like , at a price they can afford . If a small minority of people end up without coverage for whatever reason , their needs can be easily addressed . This could take place with a government safety net , an innovation by private companies , or some combination of the above . Either way , everyone will be able to have some form of coverage so that the cost of getting medical attention could be kept affordable . Beyond making sure that healthcare products and services are safe and secure , I cant see why government invention would be needed at all to make this system work . Next point : nobody is entitled to medical insurance . Frankly , nobody is entitled to anything . A government should not be in the business of providing the stuff to which we think we are entitled . The whole notion of government taking care of you from cradle-to-grave is horribly misguided . A gargantuan state and federal bureaucracy can in no way give each and every man , woman and child the treatment they deserve every day of their life . Last point : giving this gargantuan bureaucracy the legal power to force you to do business with it is a travesty of justice . We have made a horrible mistake by giving the federal government the right to tax or penalize us when purchasing health insurance . We have let it get much too cozy with the corporate providers of healthcare . Who exactly is benefiting by this illicit partnership ? Is it you ? Is it me ? Do we actually have the health insurance we need at a price we can afford ? Many Americans do not . So the answer to your question is yes , the United States government can force you to buy health insurance , and we have nobody to blame but ourselves for this sorry state of affairs .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
What do you mean by government health insurance ? If you are asking about a government health insurance plan such as Medicaid then I guess you could say it 's cheap as that is a program for the poor for which they do n't really pay anything . If you are asking about health insurance for Federal government employees they have many health insurance plan options at different price points to choose from . I do n't think many government employees think their health insurance is cheap even though their coverage is largely paid for by the government . Certainly in comparison to most of their peers in private sector companies these days most government employees pay less for their health insurance coverage .
The argument being made for the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- being unconstitutional essentially boils down to whether the United States Constitution gives the Federal Government the legal authority to compel citizens to purchase a product or service . The powers of what the Federal Government can do are -LRB- supposedly -RRB- strictly defined in the U.S. constitution with all other powers not granted to the Federal Government being granted to the individual states . There is also the issue of whether the Federal Government under its authority to regulate interstate commerce can coerce a citizen into engaging in an economic activity within the confines of their own state . This is where the argument regarding the `` individual mandate '' comes into play . Can the Federal Government penalize someone for not engaging in an economic activity , in this case refusing to purchase health insurance ? I would refer you to the United States Constitution -LRB- It 's a surprisingly short read -RRB- to make your own judgment as to whether the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is in compliance with our government 's owner 's manual .
Any person eligible to purchase health insurance in the United States , with the exception of persons qualifying for Medicaid and/or Medicare is technically eligible to use the government health insurance marketplaces . Whether you would want to or whether it would make any sense for you to use them are other issues entirely . The government marketplaces will help determine if you would qualify for any premium tax subsidy for coverage purchased through their system . If you qualify for little or no premium subsidy then you may find that the government marketplaces may not best meet your needs . You will probably have larger selection of insurance carriers as well as possibly health plan and network options you may not find in the government marketplace . You should seek out the services of a health insurance broker to helpfind the best coverage for your situation . If you have coverage provider by an employer , and this coverage is deemed affordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act , -LRB- cost does n't exceed 9.5 % of your W2 income -RRB- then neither you nor your eligible dependents will be eligible for premium tax subsidies in the government marketplaces . This does not preclude someone from purchasing individual health insurance inside or outside of the government marketplaces and in some cases buying unsubsidized individual coverage for a dependent may be less expensive than adding them as a dependent onto your group plan .
Annuity withdrawals from a non-registered immediate or payout annuity consist of an interest portion and a return of capital portion . In Canada , you are not taxed on the return of capital portion , but you are taxed on the interest portion . Think of annuities as the opposite of a mortgage . In a 25 year mortgage , early payments consist of mostly interest with little going towards the principle . With an annuity , the early payments you receive are mostly taxable interest and a little of your own principle . For those individuals who can qualify , a prescribed annuity equalizes the interest income . For example , with a 25 year annuity the total interest earned is divided by 25 and spread out equally over the term of the contact . Increased after tax income in the early years is the result . There are specific rules governing prescribed annuities , If you are interested in more information , please contact me . Income from a payout annuity may qualify for income splitting for income tax purposes . This allows you to transfer up to 50 % of the taxable income earned from the payout annuity . Missing out on the federal pension income income tax credit ? Income from a payout annuity may qualify for the $ 2,000 non-refundable tax credit . Note : Interest earned on a Guaranteed Investment Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- also may qualify . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
The annuity offerings change all the time . The best today maybe not be the best tomorrow . Annuities are categorized into basically three crediting methods : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Sentinel is a very good fixed interest rate annuity company . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Genworth is a very good index annuity company . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money . Prudential is a very good variable annuity company .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
An annuity is a systematic method of accumulation and liquidation of money that you desire to set aside for a later retirement . In the accumulation phase you mostly make deposits into your account . In the liquidation phase , you can take money from the account to provide a steady monthly income for a period of years , and even for the balance of your life . Annuities pay interest like a savings account . Unlike a bank savings account , you do n't pay income tax on the interest gained until you begin liquidating your account with either a stream of payments of lump withdrawals . When interest you earn is not taxed today , it has a chance to compound and grow faster . The government will get to tax your gain at a later time , when you start taking out the money . Some annuities can be deducted from income on your 1040 tax statement and this also helps your retirement funds grow faster . These types of annuities are referred to as `` qualified annuities '' because the annuity meets the tax law qualifications that permit taking a reduction of income for the annuity deposit . While there are lots of rules , if you go back to the start and realize that an annuity is nothing more than a method of accumulating money for retirement , and also a method of distributing money from the account in retirement , you get most of what an annuity really is . Good luck .
Government health insurance begins when you go to work for a government agency including the military . If you are a civilian employ of the government , you may also qualify for government provided health insurance . If you meet poverty guidelines you may qualify for Medicaid or SCHIP . If you are 65 or older you may qualify for Medicare .
Are we talking about fixed or variable ? I 'll assume fixed , so here goes ... Annuities , for a 5 year old : Do you know how a CD works ? An annuity is the same thing , just with a longer time until you get your money back . CD 's are issued by banks , Annuities are issued by insurance companies . Interest from CD 's are taxed each year while interest from annuities are not taxed until you take the money . Does this sound like a retirement account ? Yup , the IRS thinks so too . If you take money out before they want you to , you 're penalized 10 % -LRB- stupid government -RRB- . The longer the term , the higher the interest you should expect . CD for 12 months = low interest Annuity for 10 years = slightly more interest . Were you referring to variable annuities ? Think mutual fund account with higher fees -LRB- generally -RRB- . Now , riders ... no 5 year old would ever understand these ... except income riders . Here 's the deal : You get X percent of the balance of the account , paid to you for the rest of your life ... even if the account balance is $ 0.00 . What ? I still get paid when there 's no money left ? Yup ! That , my 5 year old friend , is an annuity -LRB- with an in come rider -RRB- . There 's a lot more to it than that . I could write a book on annuities -LRB- and many people have -RRB- . Make sure you work with a competent advisor who can speak your language . If they keep babbling about terms you do n't understand , move on and find someone else to work with .
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
Life Insurance is not governed by ERISA unless it is provided by a non-government or non-exempted employer in a group benefit plan . ERISA does not govern privately held life insurance policies by individuals who purchased them , and ERISA does not oversee the benefits paid to someone with an individual plan purchases outside of work .
Assuming you are talking about individual major medical insurance purchased after January 1 , 2014 , I think it comes down to some basic questions such as ; 1 -RRB- Do I qualify for a subsidy of my health insurance if I purchase it through the government health insurance marketplace ? The answer to this question may help you determine if you wish to purchase your coverage inside or outside of the government marketplace . In many areas of the country you will have more insurance carrier options outside of the government marketplace . 2 -RRB- Affordability - with or without a subsidy , what does your personal budget allow you to spend on health insurance premiums each month ? 3 -RRB- Plan Design & Cost Sharing - you will see a bewildering array of plan designs , many of which will look quite different from what you may have seen in the past . Terms such as Bronze , Silver , Gold & Platinum will need to mean something to you as they denote some basic levels of coverage and what you might anticipate in paying out of your pocket before your insurance benefits begin to pay . Bronze plans will offer the lowest monthly premiums but they will almost universally require you to pay a substantial deductible -LRB- perhaps $ 6000 + -RRB- before anything other than preventive care is covered . The trade off for a lower monthly premium can be more than offset by paying out of pocket for doctor 's services , inpatient & outpatient services and prescriptions . You will have to make some judgment call as to what you anticipate your health care consumptionwill be and how much up front financial exposure you are willing to take . If you are dealing with a chronic medical condition like diabetes you may be better served to pay a higher monthly premium for higher level plan designs that offer copays and lower deductibles . 4 -RRB- Provider Network - are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in the provider network for the insurance plan you may be interested in ? This is an especially sensitive area to women and one where you really need to do your homework . If you are purchasing coverage outside of the government health insurance marketplace you can be pretty confident that the providers the carrier says are in-network really are . There has been no small amount of confusion on this issue with some of the insurance plans offered in the government health insurance marketplaces . Also , you are more likely to encounter `` skinny '' networks in the government marketplaces than outside of them . The insurance products using skinny networks will generally be among the most attractively priced but the trade off is a significantly reduced provider network and possibly an environment more centered around Physician Assistants and/or Nurse Practitioners . 5 -RRB- Prescription Formulary - this kind of goes along with the points I was making above but it deserves special attention . You should not assume that every insurance carrier or even every insurance plan option offered by the same insurance carrier will cover the specific prescription medications you use . Every carrier uses prescription formularies -LRB- lists of approved drugs -RRB- and they can vary widely in what they cover , at what level they cover it , and possibly what steps you may have to go through before a specific medication would be approved for coverage . If you are using specific prescriptions you would be wise to verify their coverage status with a potential carrier before you enroll with them . 6 -RRB- Does Your Coverage Extend Beyond Your Local Area & Does it Require a Primary Care Physician Referral in Order to Visit a Specialist ? - some plan options may be restrictive as to the geographic boundaries of your coverage and may provide little or no coverage outside of their `` service ' area . If you are the stay at home type this may not be an issue for you but if you travel a lot is may be a serious factor in your decision . Also , you should not assume that you can just go directly to any specialist -LRB- even if they are in-network -RRB- without a referral from your Primary Care Physician -LRB- PCP -RRB- first . Some plans require a referral from a PCP to access specialty care . Without such a referral in these plans you may find your claim denied or treated as an out-of-network claim . You need to determine if the health plan you are considering uses such a gatekeeper approach and decide if this is acceptable to you . If you can do all these things then you will be well positioned to find a health insurance plan that best fits your needs . If you feel you are not equipped to find the answers to all these questions on your own then you should seek out an independent insurance broker to guide you through this process .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
The federal government does not offer short term disability . Government workers do not have a directly sponsoredprogramthat they are automatically enrolled in . They can purchase private coverage . There are several private companies that allow government workers to purchase group policies and pay for them with a deduction initiated through the worker 's pay center . The federal government supports social security disability for private workers , but this program does not cover temporary disabilities . Your disability must be expected to last twelve months or longer , or result in death .
Like all product considerations , non-qualified tax deferred annuities need to fit the individual saver or investor product suitability profile . Long term savers or investors that have high tax brackets should consider non-qualified tax deferred annuities . There are basically three crediting methods used in deferred annuities : interest rate crediting , indice crediting and separate sub account crediting . Interest rates are generated by the companys predominately government bond portfolio . Most indexed annuities invest their interest rate returns in domestic and foreign index options . Some indexed annuities that credit zero in a given year , still charge policy expenses and which could result in a loss . Variable annuities use equity and bond instruments in their separate sub accounts selected by the variable annuity owner . These separate sub account allocations are subject to market risk , i.e. you can lose money .
Yes . Pre-existing health conditions such as Lupus can no longer be subject to a pre-existing condition exclusion , waiting period or be the cause for declining to cover a person . Now comes the part where I may part company with some of my peers . Unless you know a lot about health insurance and all the ins and outs of what the Affordable Care Act has caused insurance companies to do in redesigning their products , provider networks and prescription formularies , do n't go to Healthcare.gov for anything more than a cursory examination of what your options might be in the government marketplace and whether you will qualify for any subsidies . You can get a reasonable estimate of these factors without having to set up an account on Healthcare.gov through web sites such as HealthSherpa.com . Persons with chronic diseases , such as Lupus , especially need the services of an experienced health insurance broker who knows the intricacies of the health insurance products sold both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplace . It is not enough to just see that a particular health insurance carrier is available in the government marketplace and your decision should not be guided solely by the monthly premium . The person with a chronic health condition generally has existing relationships with primary and specialty care providers and may have already gone through a lengthy process of finding the correct medication -LRB- s -RRB- and services for the treatment of their condition . They may even want or require access to medical facilities and providers outside of their immediate area . YOU CAN NOT TAKE FOR GRANTED THAT ALL INSURANCE CARRIERS AND THEIR PRODUCTS , ESPECIALLY THOSE SOLD WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE , WILL HAVE YOUR PHYSICIANS OR FACILITIES AS IN-NETWORK PROVIDERS OR THAT YOUR MEDICATIONS WILL BE COVERED UNDER THEIR FORMULARY . Also , access to major centers of excellence like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic , Memorial Sloan-Kettering and others certainly can not be assumed . This is a major issue especially among health plans sold in the government marketplaces where positioning your product based upon price point is key to marketing success . One of the ways that some carriers have achieved this price point positioning is through the use of so called `` skinny '' networks . Which , as their name implies , offer a reduced selection of providers and often a much more stringent and restrictive list of approved medications . Before you enroll in any health insurance plan you need to confirm with both the insurance carrier and the heath care provider -LRB- s -RRB- that all or at least as many as possible of the pieces of your care system are going to be available to you . You also need to confirm in what manner they will be available to you . Can you continue to go directly to the specialists you have been using or must you have a referral from your primary care physician before you can access that specialist now ? Will your current medication arrangement be honored or will you have to reinvent the wheel by going through a step therapy process of using other medications and having unsatisfactory results before your current medication is approved by the new carrier ? What if you have been going to a center of excellence facility out of town once a year for follow-up exams and treatment , will the new carrier allow this ? These are just some of the crucial questions any person suffering from a chronic disease needs to ask and get answered before they choose a health plan in the era of the Affordable Care Act .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will Home Insurance Cover Termites ?
Homeowner policies generally exclude damage arising from '' ... birds , vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . '' Since termites are insects I would saytheir damage isNOT covered . However the policy language of your policy is the deciding factor . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
Homeowners Insurance in all States is designed to protect homes from covered perils which occur on a ` sudden and accidental basis ' . Termite damage does n't occur instantaneously ; it is something that deteriorates over time ; homes which are well maintained , inspected and treated against termites are highly unlikely to become infected or damaged . The same is true regarding dry rot , wet rot and slow and unrepaired water leaks . It is imperative for homes to be well maintained as homeowners insurance is not designed to provide monetary reimbursement for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of homes ; if this were the case , premium would be much greater than what we pay today . Sudden and Accidental is true regarding any covered incident by the homeowners insurance policy ; covered perils will include for example items such as Fire , Wind , Hail , Water Damage , Burglary etc. . . Each of these items would occur suddenly and accidentally . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It would be a good idea to obtain a copy of your State 's Homeowners Insurance Form and ask a licensed insurance representative to review the policy form for you and highlight the paragraphs most pertinent to the specific situation . Homeowners insurance coverage forms are not often updated and it may only be necessary to review the main points once to understand the purpose of the policy and coverage afforded .
Renters Insurance does not cover termite damage . In fact termites are not the problem of the renter other then reporting to the landlord . This pest issue rests on the responsibility of the Landlord . Unfortunately the Landlords insurance will not cover the termites either since rodent , insects and vermin are excluded from a property policy . Time to call the exterminator .
Homeowners insurance excludes insects and vermin . Terminates and the damage they would cause are not covered under a homeowners insurance policy but fall under maintenance by the homeowner . I highly suggest upon discovery of termites you immediately call a professional to deal with the termites before any further damage can occur to your home .
As a rule the answer would be no . Termites are not considered a covered peril by most companies . Homeowners is not designed to cover general maintenance . Termites fall under that category . If a structure collapses then damage to the personal property may be covered and possibly the structure .
Renters insurance would not cover termites for the main reason your the renter and it 's not your property . This would fall on the responsibility of the property owner to take care of the termites . Also bad news for the property owner and property polices to not cover insects , rodents or vermin .
Homeowners insurance does not cover damage caused by insects , pests or vermin . This would include damage by termites . Damage by termites is not sudden and/or accidental but an occurrence that happens over a period of time . Generally speaking , any damage that occurs over a period of time is excluded from your homeowners policy .
Your renters policy covers damage to your personal property . The perils that are covered are described in the policy but generally exclude insect damage . If the damage is unseen and results in a collapse there could be coverage . Taking care of a termite problem is not a covered peril .
No , termite damage is usually excluded from the HO3 homeowners policy . Under the Exclusions Section of the HO3 , damage caused by Birds , vermin , rodents , or insects is excluded . If you are interested in a policy review of your home coverage please contact me at fwinterle@creativeins.net . Happy Holidays and Merry Christmas .
Damage to a structure from termites , ants and insects in general is not covered under the standard homeowner insurance policy . The underlying theory is that such damage is the result of infestation due to negligence on the part of the homeowner as the proximate cause of the occurrence . The homeowner is obligated to inspect for such damage and remedy the situation accordingly . Homeowner insurance covers structural damage that is sudden and accidental in nature . Infestation does not fit these criteria . Check with a qualified -LRB- recommended -RRB- and fully licensed pest control operation in your area . You may be able to purchase a policy or bond that would cover you for certain types of infestation after they have inspected and possibly treated your residence structure . We are talking about structural damages here . There could be coverage for damages that might occur from a roof collapse , for example , resulting from the infestation , that causes loss to other property within the dwelling . However , the infestation damage itself is not covered .
There are two basic approaches in designing a homeowners insurance policy . The first is to specify the perils that are covered . These almost always include fire . Only those perils mentioned are covered . The more popular policies today are all-risk meaning that the policy covers all perils except those that are excluded . The list of those excluded is not short ! Even though they arent excluded there are categories of property that have special limits . You should review those carefully . Then the excluded list includes things like , business activities -LRB- multi-level marketing , -RRB- motorized vehicles , animals -LRB- pets , -RRB- insects -LRB- termites , -RRB- aircraft , property of boarders , trees pants etc. , certain electronic devices , credit cards , EDP equipment that can not be replaced , There are also severe restrictions if the house is vacant , There isnt coverage for the weight of snow , continuous seepage or leakage , building settling , cracking etc. , birds , vermin , rodents , smoke .
A homeowners policy makes you whole if you suffer damage from any of the stated perils of the policy . Most homeowners policies specifically exclude damage as a result of an infestation of insects . However , if the damage is hidden and results in a collapse of part of the building , the damage is likely to be covered . Routine damage by termites isnt normally covered .
A renters policy excludes damage caused by insects unless it is hidden damage -LRB- an unsuspected termite infestation leads to the collapse of a building . -RRB- Insect services are available but the homeowners policy will not cover the expense .
Homeowner policies generally exclude damage arising from '' ... birds , vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . '' Since termites are insects I would saytheir damage isNOT covered . However the policy language of your policy is the deciding factor . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
Nope . A very common exclusion is damage caused by pests/parasites . The reason for this exclusion is it is preventable . Taking a step back , insurance is meant to provide coverage for sudden and unexpected events that can cause a catastrophic loss . If something can be prevented then there is typically no coverage . Termites fall into the category of being preventable .
The key to understanding Homeowners coverage is the word damage . While an insect infestation is messy and expensive it rarely results in damage . The language in your homeowners policy probably excludes damage caused by insects . There is a provision for unsuspected termite damage but rarely anything for bed bugs .
Damage by insects and vermin are excluded on ahomeownersinsurance policy . Of course this would include your ant problem not to mention termites and rodents . Damage that may have been caused by thesenuisanceshappen over a period of time and do not fall under the sudden and accidentaldefinition Time to call the exterminator .
There are two financially oriented universes : an insurance planning universe , and a financial planning universe . In the former , it never makes sense to buy term and those that live in that universe will give you an infinite number of reasons why - in the long run - it is a waste of your money . If you buy term , you will be called a `` termite '' . In the latter , term insurance - or permanent insurance - are viewed asfinancial vehicles that can be used to achieve a certain objective or several objectives at once , through leveraging : paying `` small '' dollars now for `` large '' dollars later . It 's called `` using the right tool for the job '' . Neither universe is right or wrong , although I would imagine you know which universe I come from . The point is to stay fixed on how much death benefit -LRB- coverage or face amount -RRB- you need and for how long . The way I see it , one needs term when they have a high need and a low budget , and a type of permanent insurance policy for when they eventually die . In other words , you need both . I recommend buying term in the higher amount that you need early in life -LRB- wife , kids , education , mortgage , etc. -RRB- for the period of time you are most likely to need it -LRB- 20-30 years -RRB- , but at the same time , buy a small face amount of permanent insurance to cover final expenses , projecting forward a nice , long lifetime and what it will probably cost to put you in a box , or reduce your mass through pyric methodolgies and put you in an urn . Allow for other final expenses , such as possible debt , medical expenses not covered by insurance , and a little `` transitional money '' for those you leave behind . That way , when your term runs out , you 'll have only the permanent plan to pay premium on , and , if you design it prudently , you might find that your final expense policy no longer needs any premium when your term runs out . You 'll need an experienced and knowledgeable agent from the appropriate universe to put this together for you so that it fits your budget . Final note : As has been appropriately mentioned in an answer above , be sure to purchase only `` fully convertible term '' for the reasons cited therein .
Most Homeowners Insurance policies will provide coverage for mostly anything short of nuclear disaster , flood or earth movement . Check with your insurance professional about the particulars of your policy and the specific exclusions it may have . Some policies provide limited coverage for mold or rot , for example . Damage caused by termites , carpenter ants or vermin are usually not covered .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How does a claim work when a driver hits a person in a parking lot walking ?
The injury , if any , caused by the driver of the car to the pedestrian would be covered under the Bodily Injury Liability portion of your auto policy . This is the portion that protects you for any neglegent action for which you are held legally responsible while you are drving your car .
This is a complicated question and really depends upon the insurance laws of your state . No-Fault States : if you live in a no-fault state then you could potentially leave your car in the street without insurance ONLY IF your car is parked in a legal zone and in a safe manner . What I mean by this is you do not want your parked car to be at risk for any liability in the case of an accident . For example , if you are parked on the street outside your house and it is within a couple of inches of the curb and no where near a fire hydrant , then if someone hits your car they will collect against their own insurance and you will not be liable if they sustain any severe physical injuries . However , if your car is in an illegal parking zone or you parked far from the curb , then the person who struck your auto might have cause for a liability suit against you . As a word of caution , just remember that you can get sued regardless of fault and you will have to defend the case until it is dismissed for lack of liability . This means you will still have to pay for an attorney , so it is better to have insurance . Tort-State : you need insurance because they person who hits your parked car will sue you to reclaim collision damages . Please note this is a very brief answer and there are other possible scenarios in both no-fault states and tort-states that can lead to you being sued for having your parked car in the street . I hope this helps .
Arizona does not . No-fault auto insurance has the insurance company pay for your damages no matter who 's at fault . In Arizona , we have uninsured and underinsured -LRB- UM/UIM -RRB- insurance for damages other people cause to you if they do n't have insurance or have enough . With state law , you have to sign whether or not you want UM/UIM coverage . Things UM/UIM may cover : A driver hitting you who does n't have insurance A driver hitting you who has insufficient coverage for your hospital bills A hit and run driver A driver who hits you while you 're walking or cycling Your medical bills when you 're a passenger in someone else 's vehicle and they have an accident -LRB- when the other driver 's insurance or theirs is insufficient -RRB- . UM/UIM is an excellent option for people looking for no-fault insurance . In fact , at our agency , we recommend UM/UIM to every one of our policyholders . If you have any questions , do n't hesitate to reach out to us at www.insuranceeddie.com .
Yes , of course . Not all auto claims involve the police or require an accident report . If the car is involved in an accident of some sort on a public road or highway , or if it is stolen or vandalized , then yes , a police report would be a potential requirement . If however , your car is hit while legally parked , or if a tree falls on it , or you hit a curb or pothole or your garage door while backing out , these are some examples of claims situations where the police would not be involved .
This isa broad question that I 'm sure will generate many different answers , but here is mine and I hope it helpsanswer your question . As you know , many drivers are distracted by their cell phone . Texting , internet applications , and email -LRB- unfortunately -RRB- arejust a few things that many drivers do while driving . Until we all are driving autonomous vehicles , this will always be an issue of concern . These distracted drivers are the onesyou need to look out for and try tostay as far away as possible . The cell phonedistractions are the causes ofmany collision claims . With regard to `` other than collision '' claims , such as avoiding hail damage etc. , just be aware of the daily weather conditions and the potential for a hail storm in your area . If you can get your vehicle to an underground garage such as a mall parking lot , or back to your home with a garage you will be able to avoid a costly `` other than collision '' claim.There is a company that is selling hail protector car covers that inflate remotely around your car like an airbag . That would be another option if you are unable to leave work or return to your home where you may have shelter for your automobile . I suggest googling `` hail car protector . `` In a nutshell , just be careful and practice defensive driving . Keep your eyes open and constantly scan your surroundings and please do n't use your cell phone while driving . I hope this answered your question and let me know if I can further assit you in your personal insurance needs .
The portion of an auto policy that covers damage caused by hitting a deer is the `` Comprehensive '' portion of the physical damage coverage . Physical damage coverage for your car is divided into two portions : Collision and Comprehensive . Collision is the more narrowly defined of the two and provides coverage if your car is damaged as a result of hitting another car , a stationary object or a human.Comprehensive covers everything else , for example , a deer strike , vandalism , somethig falling on it while parked , etc. .
Great question ! The answer depends upon a couple of things - your policies coverage , and where the laptop was when it was stolen . If it was taken from your apartment , then it generally will be . If it was in your car , parked in the apartment parking lot , there 's a good chance that you can get it replaced . If it was stolen at school , or you left it on a bus somewhere , that might be a whole lot harder to get back . I 'd advise you to contact your agent and tell them the story , and see what exactly your policy covers . Good luck ! Thanks for asking !
Assuming that your car insurance policy includes physical damage coverage for `` Comprehensive '' loss , then yes , you will have coverage if you hit a deer or any other animal . This coverage will also pay settlements for theft , vandalism , if your car bursts into flames or if an object falls on it while it is parked .
Great question ! You will need an auto insurance policy if you or anyone else will be driving the car . I would advise that the car be covered if it is not going to be driven , but is in an area where it might be hit or vandalized if it is parked . If you have any risk of having to pay for the damage done to the car , then you may want to have it insured . If you need help , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
In virtually all cases if your tree falls either on your car or a neighbors car your homeowners insurance will not pay . You are not responsible for an Act of God and are not negligent . The person in questions auto insurance comprehensive coverage would pay for the auto damage caused by the falling tree . If however it can be proven the tree owner was negligent by not taking care of a tree , and the tree was deemed as hazardous a homeowner could be held liable . -LRB- This generally means a law suit -RRB- . This is not an easy one to prove since there would of had to of been an trail of ongoing complaints both verbal and documented in writing by another party in advance to show the homeowner was negligent in maintaining the tree . Then again if a neighbor was filing complaints over a period of time against the homeowners lack of maintaining the tree that was a potential hazard why did he or she continue to park under the tree ? So at the end of the day it is the duty of all homeowners to maintain their property which includes bushes and trees and show pride of ownership a homeowner is rarely held liable for a branch falling off a tree and hitting a vehicle . The owner of the vehicle must seek coverage under his comprehensive portion of their auto insurance .
Great Question . Most insurance companies will ask year of the vehicle , Vin number of the vehicle . how many miles driven a year , what is the address the vehicle will be parked at night , Driver information . date of birth , driver license number , married or single and what coverage you desire on your car .
There are some companies that will allow you to purchase an insurance policy without a driver 's license . Typically you must have another licensed driver listed on the policy as they will exclude you from coverage , but it is feasible . Also , if you are looking for physical damage only on the vehicle while it is parked you would not be required to have a valid driver 's license . Talk to a broker to get the full story in your state .
As the result of a recent accident where a driver hit a pedestrian in the cross walk , a settlement of approximately $ 750,000 was reached . If you can afford to pay that sort of claim from your existing assets and can do so without any damage to your economic condition , then you dont need any insurance above what is mandated by state law . If not , consider the highest limits that your company will provide .
Great question ! The damage should be covered , but if it costs less to fix it than your deductible is , you may be better off not filing a claim . For example , let 's say the damage to repair your window is $ 200 . Your deductible is $ 500 . Your insurance is only going to pay anything over the $ 500 mark , so you will end up paying for the window regardless . It may not make sense to file a claim , pay for the window yourself , and then watch your rate go up . If you have renters insurance , and the car was in your apartment parking lot , there may be coverage there , depending upon the terms of your renters insurance . If you did not file a police report , I 'd recommend that you do , it will help you if you ever need documentation of damage and help collect on your claim . If you need help , feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
Shopping cart damage is generally covered by the collision portion of the auto insurance policy and subject to the deductible . So if the cost to repair a ding caused by an errant shopping cart is $ 300 and your deductible is $ 500 , there would be no insurance claim . The golden rule in parking lots : do unto others as you would have them do unto you and secure your cart when you 're done !
Police may not respond to an accident . They avoid accidents in parking lots -LRB- the scene of many accidents . -RRB- With the proliferation of smart phones , a detail evaluation of a claim can be made by submitting photos of the damage to your car , and any other cars , people or objects . Auto theft is a crime and must be reported to the police .
Car insurance does not always go up after a claim . If it is an at-fault accident , unless you have a `` forgiven '' clause , the premium will increase . But non at-fault accidents , including when your vehicle was parked should not impact prices . Comprehensive claims such as glass breakage may not increase your rates either . However , each carrier has different underwriting guidelines , so it is best to check with a broker for specific advice .
The minimum insurance requirement in California is called the financial responsibility requirement . All drivers in California are required to carry evidence that the car that they are operating is insured to these set standards . The standards are $ 15,000 per person of bodily injury liability coverage , and $ 30,000 of bodily injury liability coverage for death to more than one person . There must be % 5,000 of property damage liability insurance in place . Insurance isnt mandatory . There can be a cash deposit with the DMV of $ 35,000 , or a certificate of self-insurance issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of California , or a surety bond for $ 35,000 issued by a company authorized to do business in California . Insurance is the choice of most vehicle owners . The companies that insure cars in California are required to report the status of the policies of insurance electronically to the DMV . If you decide to no longer operate the automobile and it is not parked on a California highway or street , you must notify the DMV that you are suspending coverage , and why . The minimum coverage law allows you to purchase the most expensive auto insurance policy available . While it may be adequate in many circumstances , in those circumstances where the damages sustained exceed the limits of the policy the vehicle owner will discover that all of their assets are in jeopardy and there will not be anything to help the owner , except bankruptcy .
After we deal with the reason for the suspension not being citations and accidents , then we can look at the other possible complications . Today , computerized records and coding make the suspension a matter of record . Why were you suspended ? In many jurisdictions you can have your driving record suspended for failing to pay child support , or failing to pay a parking violation . The shortest answer is that the presence of a `` suspension '' on your MVR is an issue that can impact your insurability in the eyes of the employer and their insurance carrier . If the suspension can be clearly tied to a non-driving activity , you may be able to prevail with the employer and their insurance carrier and have the presence of the `` suspension '' overlooked . If your suspension is even remotely tied to driving activities , then this reflects on behavior and accountability and will have an impact on your employer and you as a driver on the company insurance coverage . Those impacts can range from a significant surcharge to being ineligible for coverage . The choice does n't belong to the company either . The carrier will need to be convinced your `` suspension '' is n't as relevant as it may otherwise appear . That is an uphill climb in most instances .
The world is full of places to buy life insurance . Take a walk from your home down to your local business district . You will probably pass your landscaper . There are some companies that employ laborers , clergymen , and folks in all walks of life as part-time insurance agents . Drop into your bank . In all likelihood they have somebody trained to sell the product . Stop off by your stockbroker . Same thing . Want to have a cup of coffee with your accountant ? She could very well be licensed to sell life insurance , or affiliated with a brokerage that does . Perhaps you want to drop into your local retail chain . They could be hawking policies . Come back and check your mail . Probably some offers there . Log onto the Internet . You could choose from hundreds of websites from dozens of marketing companies . It seems rather far-fetched , doesnt it , that all these various people could really have the product knowledge , underwriting expertise , industry contacts , marketplace experience , and professionalism needed to satisfy their clients ? The good news is that the life insurance salesperson is available to work with you . This person has the special skills needed to help you make an intelligent choice about this very special product . When you make the right choice , your entire financial portfolio has a firm foundation . When you make the wrong choice , the whole portfolio can collapse . Theres a lot at stake when you buy this product . That is why you need the best possible advice and counsel you can get . The people in my profession provide it .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Kind Of Insurance Do I Need On My Home ?
You need homeowners insurance at minimum . Depending on the geographic location of your home you could also need or want flood insurance . I would also recommend an umbrella policy to provide added liability protection that covers both your home and autos . To ensure that you get the protection you need and want contact your local agent , they will advise you of the coverages available so that you can make a more informed decision .
The key word in this question is `` cover '' . All life insurance can be used toward that purpose if the beneficiary chooses to use it that way . Policies can be made with a Funeral Home as the beneficiary but only one kind of policy will answer the question of `` will it cover '' . When I first entered the insurance profession in 1957 we sold a $ 1,000 or $ 2,000 ordinary -LRB- permanent , whole -RRB- life policy for a person wanting funeral expense coverage . As I increased my knowledge in the insurance industry I went to including a `` Final Expense '' amount in the practice of total planning of a persons insurance needs . At that time we figured $ 10,000 sufficient to meet the needs of final hospital expenses , taxes , burial , etc. . It was not until I was Executive Vice President of a company that was sold to a company that wrote burial insurance policies through the funeral home . I became licensed with the new company and learned , at a much older age , that there is only one policy that can REALLY say it will cover funeral costs at the persons death . That policy is available through funeral homes , it is an increasing whole life policy that the funeral home accepts for the purchase of a funeral at a specific time and then guarantees to give that equivalent funeral whenever the person dies without any further cost except some expense that might be beyond those spelled out in the contract . I began to teach classes for CE on this kind of policy for our state and for many insurance agencies . This is a completely different policy that can be of great benefit to a local independent agent working with a local funeral home . As I began to teach about this type of Life Insurance I found most Life Insurance agents had never heard of it or had been sold against it by companies writing supposed , last expense , death benefit policies . I have now written this type of policy for almost 20 years and the families of the deceased have nothing but praise for a properly planned REAL Funeral Policy . At 81 years old the death benefit of my funeral policy now exceeds the death benefit of the first policy I bought for total family protection . If I am blessed with a few more years it may equal what I used to think was a huge Life Insurance policy . I am still writing these policies on my friends . I have learned one thing over the years ! In the insurance business never close your mind to a type of policy until you have totally studied it yourself rather than being sold a bill of goods by a company that may not have the policy you are trying to learn about . Worry about that client , first and foremost , and do the best job you possibly can for that individual by increasing your knowledge of this business . I have covered some of the aspects of this policy in my recently published second edition of `` The Prophets Dollar '' , available on Amazon .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
That is a GREAT question ! The `` twin '' question to `` how much is right '' , is : `` Which KIND is right '' . There are more than 10 types of Life Insurance : at least 3 kinds of `` Term '' insurance , and at least 10 kinds of `` Permanent '' insurance . Which kind is right for you depends on your goals and needs . That would include your family situation , your financial situation , and what and who you want to benefit . Then when all that is determined the amount of benefit can be determined . A kind of `` rule of thumb '' - taken completely out of context with all the other variables is about 8 to 10 years worth of your annual income . But in reality each situation is unique to the individual client . That 's why personally I take an Education and Fact Finding approach to advising my clients on which kind and how much insurance to implement .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
I love this question ! The answer is found all over the internet . Yes , the same internet that you used to buy insurance . Look at the reviews on Yelp and others to see what kind of feedback -LRB- complaints -RRB- people are posting . The moment you begin to choose your insurance based solely on the price , you 'll begin to run into problems . Claims not handled to your satisfaction and the inability to get anyone on this continent to talk to you about it . You may save a few bucks when you purchase your insurance but you 'll lose in the long run . A good agent does something a website can never do ... care . If you have a problem with the way my company handles a claim you can walk right into my office and talk with me , and I 'll listen and do whatever I can to make you happy . I 'm accountable for the services that I provide . Flo or the Gecko will try to sell you on the idea that all insurance is the same and the price is the only thing that matters . Nothing could be further from the truth . Will Flo tell you that you 're grossly underinsured and , god forbid , you get sued , you could be paying for the rest of your life ? Nope . But a good agent will , and it probably would n't cost that much more . The internet has n't made the insurance agent obsolete . On the contrary , it proves why you need a good one . Insurance is n't a simple point and click product . There are many different aspects that fit together to make it work for you , and it 's different for everyone . I 've never had a client tell me I 'm overcharging them after we 've rebuilt their home . Will the lizard show up at your home at 2am when your house is still burning ? I have , it 's what I owe my clients . There are bad agents out there , I 'll admit . I 've met quite a few . However , most good agents take their responsibility seriously and they truly care about their clients . So , in summary , agents are necessary only if you want someone who cares about covering your family correctly .
First I 'd like to say that your question , `` Do I need life insurance now that I 'm getting married '' is a mature question that indicates you genuinely care about your future wife and family and are an intelligent thinker ! Good on ya ! The answer to whether you need insurance or not really relies on your financial strength and goals . If you have a few million dollars in liquid assets you probably do n't NEED insurance ... but you may still WANT to have Whole Life , Cash Value life insurance . The wealthiest people in the world typically are the biggest buyers of WL insurance , because of the value it has . On the other hand there are many people who are self insured feeling that the money they have acquired is sufficient to cover the needs of their family in the event of their demise . Obviously those people do n't know what the wealthiest people know about WL insurance . So in order to determine what kind of life insurance you should consider , -LRB- there are over 10 different kinds of life insurance -RRB- , and how much is appropriate , you should consult with a life insurance professional - preferably one who is not tied to just one provider and can help you to implement the program that will be the best for you . If you would like to talk about this further you can call or email me . I 'm only licensed in Hawaii , but I 'm happy to help you with the more important questions .
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
-- > Normal 0 I can suggest of a number of reasons . First , if I own a car and while it is being used it hurts someone or damages their property , I feel one has a moral obligation to reimburse them for their injuries or damage . Moral obligations would seem to be one of the cornerstones of any society . Since most people dont have a pile of cash hanging around to reimburse people who they hurt , auto insurance is a convenient efficient mechanism that helps people do that . For a relatively small amount of money , an insurance company will agree to reimburse someone should my car injure them . Depending on my moral compass , that limit could be anywhere from a few thousand to several hundred thousand dollars . Of course , I also might realize when driving my car someone could hurt me or passengers in my car . So , I might like to have the same kind of agreement with the insurance company , pay me if someone hurts me and doesnt have any insurance or not enough to make me whole again . Then of course , if I run into someone or something with my car and damage it , it would be nice not to have to come up with a large sum of money to fix or replace it . So it makes sense to include that in the deal I make with the insurance company . Most states have enacted laws , which say if you want to drive your car on our highways , you have to agree to be responsible for any damage you cause . To back up that promise , you have to prove you are financially able to do that . You can either put up a substantial sum of money in the form of a bond or an insurance company will do that for you for a price . In a nutshell , these are the basic reasons to consider buying insurance . And if you want to consider the alternatives , walking , driving a car only around your own yard or coming up with a large sum of cash , I think you will find insurance a very attractive alternative .
Ask yourself these questions : Do you own your home ? Do I want to pass it to my family ? What about my other assets ? If I had to go to a nursing home do I want to have to spend down my assets to qualify for Medicaid ? What will my family do if this happens ? Proper planning can help insure that when your time comes that you need care your family will not have to suffer the burden of taking care of your personal needs . Help will be available to allow you to stay at home rather than being forced into a nursing home and losing all your hard earned money and assets . Talk to a good Care Resource Planner familiar with not only Long Term Care Insurance , but also Medicaid , Veterans Benefits , and other sources that could save you literally thousands of dollars .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
The advantages of having life insurance is knowing that your financial obligations will be taken care of and not a burden on your survivor . The disadvantage of life insurance is that for the vast majority the insureds do not match their Survivor 's need for cash upon their death with the ` Right Kind ' of insurance plan . Consider for example : a married insured whose Spouse relies upon their income to sustain the expenses of daily living . What is the ` Right Kind ' of Life Insurance plan and what is the ` Right Amount ' of death benefit ? Term Insurance 's disadvantage is the fact that very few deaths occur in the coverage period . Their need for income remains unprotected . Permanent plan 's disadvantage is the fact that only the wealthy can afford the face amounts required to support a Survivor 's need for lifetime income . Reversionary Annuity by design is the ` Right Kind ' of life insurance plan when Survivor Income is the need . It is much more affordable than Permanent plans and 100 % of the Surviving spouses will receive its benefit .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is A Life Insurance Wrapper ?
A life insurance wrapper is a terrible metaphor for the tax advantaged features of a life insurance policy that allows crediting methods like interest rates , indices and separate subaccounts using equities and bond investments . Life insurance accumulated tax deferred and a TAMRA compliant non modified endowment policy can generate tax free income provided that the life insurance policy is kept in force the life of the insured . The life insurance wrapped around the crediting method is the marketing approach here .
A life insurance wrapper for all intent and purposes is a structured investment tool which combines investments in funds and life insurance . The insurance wrapper allows the policy holder a choice of which funds they wish to invest in . In lieu of paying premiums the policyholder would pay the assets or funds that he chooses . Since the assets or funds are already paid to the insurance company they would not be attachable by creditors since they would not be considered the policy holders assets and therefor the policy holder would be 100 % protected .
A life insurance wrapper is a terrible metaphor for the tax advantaged features of a life insurance policy that allows crediting methods like interest rates , indices and separate subaccounts using equities and bond investments . Life insurance accumulated tax deferred and a TAMRA compliant non modified endowment policy can generate tax free income provided that the life insurance policy is kept in force the life of the insured . The life insurance wrapped around the crediting method is the marketing approach here .
The is life insurance slang that agents and registered representatives use to promote the tax advantages of a non-modified endowment contract life insurance policies to savers and investors for supplemental retirement income . The metaphor , wrapper , may be a poor one , perhaps tax favored treatment would be better . If designed correctly , these tax favored policies can generate tax free withdrawals of basis and policy loans of gain , which will not be included in the provision income test for Social Security benefit taxation . But one major proviso : these contracts must be kept in force for the life of the insured . Any termination or lapse could trigger an ordinary income tax event on the constructive receipt of policy loans and any internal policy loans used to pay annual interest due .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
If you were to cover every contingency of life with life insurance , you probably could not afford that much . Life insurance is a wonderful resource for the `` what if 's '' of life , but the `` what if 's '' can be endless . What if you died leaving your family without your income . What if before you died , you used up all your savings on doctor bills . Then , what if your spouse died shortly after you . What if the person you designated to care for your children , had just lost their job . What if ... . No one can have enough life insurance to cover every possible tragedy . But you can have enough life insurance to give your loved ones a chance . Providing them with enough income to give them time to adjust to life without you , without having to worry about getting a new job -LRB- or adding a second job to the one they already have -RRB- , is a good place to start . Giving them enough to live on until your children are grown , or for 10 years , is also a reasonable amount .
A nearly impossible question to answer . How much premium can you afford ? What carrier are you purchasing coverage with ? What is your health/medical history ? What is your family/medical history ? What is your occupation ? What is your geographic location ? What is you age ? What is you height/weight ? These are just some of the factors used to determine the amount of coverage and the premium that you would pay for that coverage ; that a carrier might use . Most carriers will handle coverage rates up to one million on a regular basis . Contact a local agent to find out what would be available to you .
here is a good chance you will . Lets cover some of the what ifs : What if you need to maximize your pension distribution by taking it out during your lifetime only ? Life insurance will help you cover your spouse . What if you have any remaining debts , such as a second mortgage ? Or if you have any dependents , such as a child who still need some financial assistance ? Life insurance would protect them . What if you want a really strong guaranteed portion of your asset portfolio ? The guarantees in life insurance cash value contracts are very competitive . What if your net worth is high and you want to preserve your estate from federal and state taxation ? Life insurance would allow you to protect your assets and still pay the government . What if you have formed very strong ties with a charity , and would like to support it as a legacy ? Life insurance can turn a comparatively small premium into a very substantial gift for them . Its kind of surprising , isnt it , about how our need for life insurance can basically last our entire life !
I am sorry to hear about your financial difficulties . Before surrendering your Whole Life Policy please consider that you will no longer have coverage and if you were to apply in the future the cost will be more than what you are locked into now . That said , you may have some options available to you . First , have you considered just withdrawing or taking a loan from the cash value ? This way the policy will still be in force . Be sure to understand what the surrender value is as well on the policy . It may mean you will get less out of the policy than what you were thinking . Please consider what will happen if death was to occur in the next 5 years , 10 years , etc. and what financial situation this may put you in . I would recommend contacting your Broker/agent to discuss your options . If you do not have one , I would be more than happy to look over what you have and make any recommendations based on what your needs are and what is available from the policy . This is a free service . Feel free to contact me at : mattb@denverwestip.info or call me at -LRB-720-RRB-708-5498 .
It depends on many factors , but here are the main factors for price . 1 -RRB- What 's the policy type ? 2 -RRB- What 's the face amount ? 3 -RRB- What 's your gender ? 4 -RRB- What 's your age ? 5 -RRB- What 's your general health like ? 6 -RRB- Are you a tobacco user ? What you should look at are basically two main questions . What does the life insurance cover and how much do I need ? Cost is a factor for a policy , but it 's much more important to get the right policy with the riders you 'll need .
1 . Is there an annual deductible ? 2 . What is the maximum annual out of pocket costs ? 3 . What does it cost to see a doctor ? 4 . What is the cost of lab work and x-rays ? 5 . What is the cost of outpatient surgery ? 6 . What is the cost of a hospital stay ? 7 . What are the wellness benefits ? 8 . What do prescription drugs cost ? The most important question to ask with respect to buying health insurance now is are my doctors in the network ?
Where you should buy Term Life is from an independent life insurance broker . What type depends on a number of factors : what you want the coverage to cover , for how long , is there a chance you would want to convert the coverage to permanent . I suggest you contact an independent life insurance broker who can give you a quote after discussing what the coverage is needed for . Do not forget to ask what are your options when the term renews . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Typically , yes . But lets cover some of the what ifs . What if you had no history of cancer , but then unfortunately come down with it after you take the policy ? Youre covered . What if you had a history of cancer , but didnt disclose it to the broker when you applied ? Nor did you tell him or the examiner about any doctors who treated you ? Thats a big no-no . Thats insurance fraud . The carrier could contest the claim in the first two years . To tell you the truth , they might even come after you after that . What if you just completed cancer treatment last year ? Carriers typically like to wait 2 to 5 years before making an offer . However , I have seen offers made sooner , under exceptional conditions . What if you are a woman , and you have no history of breast cancer , but it runs in your family ? With all other things being equal , you could certainly be eligible for coverage now . But the family history might preclude you from getting the rock-bottom rates -LRB- sorry - blame the actuaries :-RRB- What if you have an accident-only policy ? No coverage for illnesses such as cancer . But what if you had cancer , but tragically the cause of death was a plane crash ? Different story .
Only you can answer this question of Life Insurance being essential . For those of us who see the financial loss in families who lost a parent or spouse , Life Insurance relieves financial stress allowing you to take care of what is most important , your family . YES , I believe life insurance is essential . Life Insurance provides you or rather your beneficiary with monies otherwise would not be available . You need to look at what is important in your life , who depends on you , your family , perhaps your business and look at what will happen if you are not there `` tomorrow '' . What will happen financially and how would you relieve that financial stress .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Who has the cheapest life insurance rates ? It 's going to depend on what gender , what face amount , what duration and even what payment mode ... Actually the cheapest life insurance rates are really dependent upon the applicant 's good health . Your `` discounts '' on premiums for life insurance come from your good health .
end question
start question
life-insurance
When Does Life Insurance Payout ?
In addition to the helpful information Rich gave , I might add that permanent policies can pay out when the policy matures or endows . That is when the cash value of the policy equals the face amount of the policy . Also , ROP -LRB- return of premium -RRB- policies can pay back all the premiums paid in , usually when a term policy ends .
Typically after proof of death with a document verifying that there has been a death with the insured 's identity . Also this must pass the 2 yr contestibility period as well . Any other questions can be directed to the insurance company or your agent of record who can hopefully give you some guidance on what to expect .
The typical payout for life insurance is upon death of the insured . There are several other options available in different policies . The first being accelerated death benefit . This can be paid prior to the insureds death when they have been diagnosed with a terminal illness . In some of the more recent policies there are riders that allow partial payments for qualified long term care situations . You can also find out if your policy can be assigned to a viatical company and you can `` sell '' your policy to them for a reduced amount based on the life expectancy of the insured . In any of these situations it is beneficial to speak with your life insurance company to determine exactly what the policy language provides .
A very important part of Whole Life Insurance is the ability to take money out of your policy , as a `` loan '' , which you may choose to never pay back , if you need the funds for a child 's college education , a home down payment , your retirement , or even a car ! Gary Lane , Registered Representative , New York Life , 9497972424 .
In Canada , there are two basic types of immediate -LRB- payout -RRB- annuities , term certain and life annuities . Term certain annuities payout over a specified term and then stop . Life annuities payout over the lifetime of the annuitant -LRB- can be joint life -RRB- . Life annuities can also include a guaranteed payout option . Life annuities are only available from life insurance companies . Term certain annuities are available from available from life insurance companies and other financial institutions including banks and trust companies.There are a number of different options to consider when purchasing an annuity too numerous to cover here . You would be best served by working with an independent insurance broker who can help you find the right plan . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Creditors can not go after the life insurance payout to pay the debts of the deceased insured person , as long as the beneficiary or beneficiaries who are receiving the life insurance proceeds are actual people . Life insurance bypasses probate , so the creditor does not have the opportunity to access the life insurance payout . If the beneficiary is the insured person 's estate , the creditors may be able to go after the life insurance death benefit to pay the debts of the insured . If the beneficiary is the one who has the debts , then the creditors can go after the life insurance payout . This is also true if the beneficiary shared a debt with the deceased .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
When you select a period certain payout option for a fixed annuity , the monthly payments will cease when the selected term period expires . For example , if you selected a 20 year period certain fixed annuity , your monthly payment would stop after 20 years . You are given a number of options when you first create your annuity - one being how long you want the payments for -LRB- a specified period of time , or continue on for life -RRB- . The shorter the payout period , the higher the payment . If you want it to payout for the rest of your life , the monthly payment would be lower . It 's important to review your options with an experienced insurance broker -LRB- I would recommend one with a background in estate planning to be most beneficial -RRB- when purchasing an annuity as each company may offer a different rate so some companies may offer you a higher monthly payment than others for the same purchasing price . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your annuity program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Is an annuity guaranteed for life ? Well you may be an annuity payout and the short answer is yes . You can not outlive an immediate annuity that pays you a stream of income for your life . You can even establish guarantee windows that will continue to pay a payout after you 've passed . they are called period certain payouts . But yes , you can not outlive an annuity payout .
When the beneficiary receives a life insurance payout , the insurance company will work with them to help make the payout most beneficial for their situation . If there is a mortgage to pay off , taking the payout in a lump sum may work best . If the beneficiary needs the life insurance proceeds for income , taking the death benefit in monthly installments may work better . The life insurance company pays interest to the beneficiary on money left in the policy until it is taken out .
How long does a life insurance payout take ? From days to months depending on the situation . I have had million dollar payouts in 4 days before , because we provided everything for the claim to be paid up front . Usually you are required to provided a certified copy of the death certificate and any provisions the policy may have required . The insurance company pay interest on the payout from the date of death to the date of delivery .
Single Immediate Annuities Payouts are determined by gender , age and the length of the payout , i.e. 10 years , 20 years , etc. . But the most popular immediate payout is lifetime annuitization where the interest rate of return is combined with mortality credits based on the age of the annuitant . The additional tax benefit of a non-qualified immediate annuity annuitized payout is the exclusion ration which comprises part of the payment and represents the tax free distribution of basis .
Annuities are a stream of steady income paymentsduring retirement . Money is contributed during the early years . Money is contributed compounded income andtax deferred , however the earnings are not . Withdrawals are advised at the age beginning 591/2 . You may agree to pay at lump sum one time payment or at a monthly premium . The forms of payments for payout are Lifetime Income is which you are paid for a certain amount of years like 20 , 30 , or 40 . and the benificiary is to receive the remainder upon death of the annuant . Another form of pay out is Lifetime Pay Outs which are fixed or variable , and payouts are for he lifetime of the annuant until death . Another form is Incomefor Life with a Guaranteed period Certain period which are payouts for life with a benificiary option of you die while this payout is in process .
What are annuities ? Well as simply as possible , Annuities are investment products offered through insurance companies . There are different kinds of annuities , some for building balances and others for spending balances of money . The building balances form of annuity is invested and grows tax deferred over time . This is known as the accumulation phase . Depending on your choice of accumulation annuity you can have little risk to significant risk on return . Reducing your investment risk usually also means reducing your investment return . Accumulation annuities can offer a larger range of risk and return options along with tax deferral . When you decide to spend or distribute savings through an annuity , it is called an immediate annuity and begins a systematic series of regular payouts over your lifetime . An immediate annuity is know as a product that you `` ca n't outlive '' as it will pay you as long as you live . And , depending on the payout you choose , can guarantee that if you pass early , the payouts will continue to a beneficiary of your choosing for a set number of years or until all of your contributed funds are spent . An immediate annuity now offers a variety of payout options and really should be considered as part of a retirement portfolio . They provide a constant steady stream of income that will last as long as you do and if you choose an option will keep pace with inflation over time .
There are many factors that go into determine what an annuity will payout per month . The primary factor is the type of annuity you have . Additionally , there are usually options associated with the payout of an annuity , so answering your question without more information is not possible . If you are considering an annuity payment , be sure to compare all of your options . Here are some general factors that go into determining annuity payments -LRB- not all apply to each type of annuity and payout option -RRB- : The amount put into the annuity The growth of the annuity over time The age of the person -LRB- s -RRB- at the time annuity payments begin The age of the spouse if a joint payout applies The length of time the payments are guaranteed to last
Once you file your claim , you 'll need to make yourself available to the insurance company in case any complications arise . If you 're named as the sole beneficiary on the policy in question , your case should be relatively straightforward . You 'll need to choose whether you 'll receive your payout as a lump-sum payment or as an ongoing annual disbursement . If you opt for the former option , you could receive the entirety of the payout to which you 're entitled within two weeks . If you opt for the latter option , you could receive your first payout in just 10 to 14 business days . In both cases , your payouts will come in the form of an official bank check . If you prefer to receive your payments electronically , you may be able to provide your insurance company with your bank account information and receive your funds via an electronic funds transfer .
Annuity withdrawals from a non-registered immediate or payout annuity consist of an interest portion and a return of capital portion . In Canada , you are not taxed on the return of capital portion , but you are taxed on the interest portion . Think of annuities as the opposite of a mortgage . In a 25 year mortgage , early payments consist of mostly interest with little going towards the principle . With an annuity , the early payments you receive are mostly taxable interest and a little of your own principle . For those individuals who can qualify , a prescribed annuity equalizes the interest income . For example , with a 25 year annuity the total interest earned is divided by 25 and spread out equally over the term of the contact . Increased after tax income in the early years is the result . There are specific rules governing prescribed annuities , If you are interested in more information , please contact me . Income from a payout annuity may qualify for income splitting for income tax purposes . This allows you to transfer up to 50 % of the taxable income earned from the payout annuity . Missing out on the federal pension income income tax credit ? Income from a payout annuity may qualify for the $ 2,000 non-refundable tax credit . Note : Interest earned on a Guaranteed Investment Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- also may qualify . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
In Canada annuities there are two main types of annuities : accumulation annuities and payout annuities . If they are issued by an insurance company they can/do include maturity & death benefit guarantees , potential creditor proofing , estate bypass -LRB- privacy and costs -RRB- and more . They are used extensively by retirement and estate planners . The topic of annuities with all our industry jargon is indeed confusing . Experience has taught me that an understanding the basics is the key step . 1 . An accumulation annuity is as the name suggests is used to save money , a payout annuity option is included as part of the contract . There are two main types of accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- - principle is guaranteed and interest is earned similar to a GIC Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIF -RRB- - similar to a mutual fund , the principle is at risk , however , with maturity and death benefit guarantees , etc. . In Canada , they are also referred to a segregated funds or variable annuities . 2 . Payout Annuities , you exchange a sum of money for a flow of income . There are many variations with different guarantees but the basic two types are : Annuity certain , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for a specified number of years . Life annuity , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for the rest of your life or with a joint life . These are usually purchased with a guarantee payment period . The more guarantees , the lower the income . To understand an annuity , first understand a mortgage . With a mortgage you receive a lump sum of money and pay back principal and interest over a specified term until the balance is zero . With a payout annuity certain you are at the opposite side of the equation , you exchange a lump sum of money for a guaranteed income stream for a specified term . You will find 16 `` I want to ... How do I '' , that illustrates some strategies using annuities on www.jpw.ca Annuity strategies can be complicated . It is your money and you would be prudent work a life insurance broker with a professional designation like a CLU -LRB- Chartered Life Underwriter -RRB- or a CFP -LRB- Certified Financial Planner -RRB- . If you have further questions please contact me . Paul
There are a couple answers to this depending on what type of policy was purchased . With a term policy , the payout will be the stated policy face amount , less any monies used previously for terminal illness payout . With universal life type policies it could be face amount -LRB- less any terminal illness withdrawal -RRB- or face amount , plus cash values -LRB- less any terminal illness payment -RRB- Whole life depending on the type chosen and internal workings selected can either pay face -LRB- less terminal -RRB- or face plus additional paid up additional face amount earned over the life of the policy . Death benefits will also include any interest earned between date of death and date claim is paid . With cash value policies any outstanding policy loan values will also reduce the payout .
The combination of mortality credits and the interest rate yield create a compelling reason to investigate lifetime income you cant outlive . Generally speaking , annuities offer payout options to their policy owners . Some elect to take out withdrawals other predetermined schedules like ten years or twenty years certain . But a popular payout option in a non-qualified annuity is annuitization for the life of the annuitant based on his or her age . This is also the exclusion ratio where basis is amortized to life expectancy as part of the initial payouts .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How To Make Car Insurance Quotes Cheaper ?
A great deal of information used in an auto quote is automated . The program knows who the drivers are in the household , what cars are registered to the address and the losses and driving records are easily obtained . In California we also get the estimated annual mileage for every vehicle . It is very difficult to manipulate the data as so much is public information .
That is a great question ! Please remember that quotes are just that - an effort to get you to purchase their product , and not an actual price . The best way to get lower quotes is to seek more of them , and do n't be afraid to tell one company that another beats their price . A good way to lower your auto insurance cost is to look at the company that your life or homeowners insurance is with . Bundling your policies with one company will often lower the prices them . A good driving record never hurts also ... Thanks for asking !
The proper way and best way is to compare through an LOCAL independent agent . and check with many local agents because unfortunately some agents will not always give you the best rates available or apply the discounts that can be applied . I personally have quoted with clients who brought quotes in from other agencies and been $ 100 a month cheaper with the same carrier . Unfortunately some agencies are no different then car salesmen Trust your gut talk to the person and go into the office and see how they operate are they there to really help you or are they there just to make a profit ? It is sad to see this in the industry but it does happen . Also look to see what kind of service they provide are they making you wait for the quote are they prompt are they willing to answer the 24/7 or is it they type of agency that sells you a policy and the next time you call with a question or an issue they send you to a 800 to talk to the carrier because they wo n't service our policy . Make sure they listen to your needs not just making you a number .
I am not aware of the term joint car policy . However , if you mean , Is it cheaper to have two cars on the same policy or with the same company ? the answer is generally , yes . Most car insurers offer a multi-car discount . If you are really asking if it is cheaper to have an auto policy with two insureds , technically , it doesnt make any difference . In California auto policies are issued to households and all the drivers in the household are considered .
That is a great question ! There is a reason why cheaper things are cheaper . In the case of life insurance , term policies are much cheaper than whole life policies are . The reason ? Term policies have zero frills . They rarely have to pay out , as the terms usually expire before you do ; and they have nothing extra in the payment but insurance costs , so there is no accumulating cash value either . Term policies can be a good option in some cases , please be sure that you speak with an agent to make sure that it is right for your needs . Thanks for asking !
It 's pretty simple ; those who are comparing the most number of quotes are the best way to get the lowest auto insurance rates . Again you want to get as many quotes as possible online and off line . Discounts and other offers make your auto insurance policy cheaper if you qualify . Here are a few good driver discounts , vehicle safety discount like alarms and Onstar , also low mileage can help but you may need proof that you drive very low miles per year . Good student , college degree , good credit and occupation . Try this out when shopping around ; you should save money with these tips .
The only answer I can provide is maybe , and it really depends upon your financial situation . You can drive with Public Liability and Property Damage -LRB- PLPD -RRB- insurance . This covers your liability to another party in the case of an accident . When you get sued for an accident , this is where the huge claims come into play and where most people ca n't for it out of pocket . Comprehensive and collision coverage cover damage to your own vehicle . This type of coverage is not required . Most people only carry PLPD on older cars , where it is cheaper to replace the car then it is to insure it -LRB- e.g. a winter car worth $ 1,200 -RRB- . Now , there are some contractual obligations that might require you to get comprehensive and collision insurance . An example of this is a car lease . The lessor will require full coverage and to be named as a loss payee . This way , in case its collateral is destroyed , it can recoup its financial investment . In summary , make sure you can afford replacing the car if you go with PLPD .
This is a very complicated subject . In California all the drivers in a household are included on an auto policy . Parents dont want the additional expense of insuring their cars with an inexperienced driver in the household . Some purchase a car and place the car in the 18 year olds name . They then buy the cheapest auto insurance with just the bare legal limits . The problem arises when the inexperienced driver injures others in an accident and the injured party starts suing . The lawyers will not stop at the limits of the policy purchased for the 18 year old . I have seen them even go after grandparents who loaned money to the 18 year old . Your only recourse is the low limit policy purchased for the car . The rest of the lawsuit comes after everything that you own . It is usually cheaper to include the inexperienced driver on the family policy . If you add another car you can isolate the expense to that car but at least you can have the advantages of discounts and perhaps save yourself from bankruptcy down the road .
If we were to average the insurance cost on one new car of every make and model , and do the same for every truck and SUV , the difference in cost between the rate will largely be the difference between the group of cars with a higher average value . Recent research has shown trucks to be slightly less expensive for occupants because they weather an accident better in a vehicle with greater mass -LRB- weight -RRB- . On the other hand , trucks are causing slightly greater injuries to those hit by trucks and inside the cars they hit . Dollar for dollar I 'd give a very slight edge to trucks as cheaper to insure .
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
The value of a whole-life insurance policy depends on many factors , including the premium that has been paid , the amount of guaranteed cash value that hasaccumulated , and what dividends -LRB- if any -RRB- have been paid and how they have been used . Whole life premiums are much cheaper when you are younger . An experienced broker can provide multiple quotes , free information and expert advice for you .
The Cheapest Homeowners Insurance is a summary of a complicated process . Insurance carriers either hire actuaries or contract with an actuarial firm to review statistics , assess risk and therefore assign a premium charge to risk . This complicated process translates to premium charged for home insurance . As a result of the above , carriers may have a lower -LRB- cheaper -RRB- premium in one area or in one size class of homes but then a higher premium in another ! An insurance professional that understands the complete process should be able to explain exactly how this cumbersome but necessary process works . In addition , insurance carriers all use a slightly different process in calculating the Replacement Value of Construction on each home , this calculation is the Dwelling Coverage assessed to rebuild the home in the event of a covered total loss . You may find cases where the ` cheapest ' -LRB- price per thousand -RRB- insurance company may use a higher reconstruction value thereby complicating your process of finding the cheapest insurance premium . If one is determined to find the cheapest insurance , it would be recommended to obtain quotes from several companies and comparethe details . After answering all the characteristics related questions and other underwriting questions , there will be one further and critical issue after issuance of the policy : each company will send an independent inspector to take photos , take measurements and report any obvious hazards to the underwriter . The inspection process is a necessary step paid for by the insurance company ; it is a final check to assure that the risk has not been misrepresented in any way thus causing the carrier to take on adverse risk . Some carriers request only a drive by/exterior inspection and some carriers request a full inspection which will require making an appointment with the homeowner . If following the inspection , there are any unacceptable underwriting hazards that were found , the underwriter will send out an advisory notice and if necessary a cancellation notice which may or may not include the possibility for corrective action . On another point , if the inspector finds that the home is customized , some carriers require inspectors to produce an updatedreconstruction cost estimator which will accordingly increase the dwelling coverage amount on the original policy thus raising the original premium . In summary , a homeowner should speak to an insurance professional , openly explain each and every concern and allow the professional to explain the process specific to the risk . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The lowest premium on senior whole life is usually $ 15 . But the cost for you is determined by how much death benefit you buy and your exact age , gender , smoker status , etc. . You can pull up free rate quotes for many of the lowest priced senior whole-life companies right here WEBSITELINK All these companies will lock your rate in for life with full guarantees . You can find cheaper premiums if you allow them to give you non-guaranteed rates . I do not recommend that .
Life insurance is cheaper to buy when you are younger if your health is good or you have no other risk . Some things that can afflict a younger person do not show up so much in older persons : DUI 's , suspended drivers licenses , suicide attempts , some mental disorders , and type 1 diabetes , to name a few . While under the age of adulthood , some of these conditions can make it impossible for a child or teen to get life insurance , although there are usually policies to be had for each of these after age 19 . And sometimes more years of control or stability can actually bring the rate down . However , in the absence of those situations , it is usually cheaper to buy life insurance when you are younger .
In Montana you able to purchase insurance at that age but you are not allowed to own a car in only your name till your 18 . so If you were to purchase insurance you would have to have your parents or parent listed as a driver which also would make the insurance much cheaper . Or you could purchase what is called a non-owned auto policy that would cover you for liability to others but would not repair the car you were driving . I recommend you check your states laws which you can find on your states website . Or talk to a local agent in your area .
Great question ! Many years ago I purchased a policy at a dealership in Maryland so that I could drive the car I 'd just bought home . Some dealerships will have an agent that works there , -LRB- usually in the financing department -RRB- but often it is cheaper for you to call your agent , and have the new car added to your policy and emailed or faxed to the dealership while you wait . It can save you a few bucks , and a lot over the long run - like a gas station near the rental car return , they know if you need it , they can charge more , you will spend it . Thanks for asking !
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
Its really not a question of what is better . Its a question of knowing how to use the flexibility built into the product . Universal life insurance can accommodate flexible premium payments . At the same time , it makes available premium guarantees . If you overuse the flexibility of the product , you can lose the guarantees . A certain payment commitment must be made to the company if you want them to guarantee the coverage for a specified amount of time . If you overfund , then underfund , then stop paying , then start paying again , odds are you wont get the guarantee you want for the time you want . But if you are smart about it , you can have your cake and eat it too . You can take advantage of the flexibility of the product to come up with a creative funding strategy . So the flexibility is really best utilized in the design stage . Then , when you come up with a payment schedule that is suitable , you make your payment commitment . You stick with the program . What kind of payment strategies could you employee with this product ? The options are many . You could fund the policy with a single premium . Make a payment in year one , and then not make any at all . But you still get a lifetime guarantee . You could go to 10-year pay , or a 20-year pay , or 30 years pay scenario . Pay the premium for that period only , but still get a lifetime guarantee . These strategies allow you to on the one hand , not pay for your life insurance for the rest of your life . At the same time , they still give you the lifetime guaranteed coverage you want . Of course , you need to consult with your broker and the company to calculate the correct amounts needed to limit your payments but also get the guarantee . Then again , you could just go the route of continuously paying a premium on a yearly basis . You would have to keep paying , but the premium here would be much cheaper than the first two scenarios . So what is your priority ? Would it be the lowest annual outlay , or paying the premium for the shortest duration ? The flexibility of universal life gives you additional interesting options . You could structure the coverage for a defined amount of years . It could be 10 years , 20 years , or 30 years . The premium and the death benefit could be guaranteed for that amount of time . After that , you lose the guarantee . Why would somebody do that ? Why wouldnt they just buy term insurance ? Well , in many cases underwriting concessions are made for permanent insurance that you dont get with term insurance . The price for universal life could actually be lower than term insurance . As a matter of fact , sometimes carriers will offer only universal life insurance and not term insurance . The flexibility of this product can really enable you to make your life insurance work to your best advantage . You just have to know how to use it .
That is a great question ! There are some really important decisions for you to make when it comes to your insurance policies now . Here are some things to consider : 1 . -RRB- Do n't forget to change the beneficiaries on your life insurance policies to reflect your new spouse . If something were to happen to you , would n't you want them to get the money ? 2 . -RRB- Look at your auto insurance policies - shop both companies and see who will offer the cheaper rate for you , if your spouse were to be added to your respective policy . Consider the advantages of consolidating your renters/homeowners policy there also , to gain bigger discounts . 3 . -RRB- Your marraige qualifies as a life event that allows you to switch your health insurance coverage . Whose policy is cheaper to add the other to ? Check into that also . You can save a bundle , with just a few phone calls . I hope you find that true for you . Congratulations , and may God bless and keep your marriage ! Thanks for asking !
Regardless of the brand of insurance you apply for the premium you pay will be determined by several factors . Your age , height-weight , health history , gender , tobacco use , etc. are all things that will affect your premium . How much coverage you want and how long you want to be covered are big factors too . Do you want coverage until the day you die regardless of how long you live ? That would mean you want whole life . Or do you want coverage for only a few years until the kids are raised and your debts are paid off ? That would mean term life insurance and you can buy that much cheaper . If you want the best premium , do n't search for any one brand or company . Compare rates for many companies using a quoter such as WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Get Health Insurance With MS ?
You can get health insurance with MS. Multiple Sclerosis is a serious disease with many complications . However , under the new ACA legislation , you will not be denied coverage because of the condition . Finding the best policy for your situation is critical and that 's why , as an experienced broker , we can find the best plans for you . Consumers that visit our website -LRB- see my profile -RRB- can compare top-rated plans and also qualify for a federal subsidy during Open Enrollment . The combination of medications and other treatment for MS is very expensive . There are several available plans that will reduce copays and deductibles and make treatment much less expensive . But the best part is that you do n't have to answer questions during OPen Enrollment to obtain quality coverage .
Most people with MS can get life insurance . If you have relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis that has not caused you to go on disability , there is a good chance of getting a medically underwritten policy for any amount you want and in any type of policy that you want . If you have progressive MS , you will probably need to get a simplified issue policy , but you can still get a policy . If you need assistance with ADL 's or are in a wheelchair , you can get Guaranteed Issue Life Insurance if you fit the age guidelines . Be sure to talk to an agent who understand MS Life Insurance so that you can save yourself frustration . It does not have to be an ordeal to get life insurance while having MS.
Getting Disability Insurance with MS is extremely difficult . Graded policies claim to cover those with Multiple Sclerosis , but the requirements are so restrictive that almost no one can get it . If you have very mild MS and no exacerbations in years , it is worth a try ! Living Benefit Life Insurance policies are one method of getting benefits that you have the option to use during your life , and this type of policy is not as difficult to qualify for as Disability Insurance , when you have MS. If unable to do two more more ADL 's , it can be accessed for cash to pay bills and use as you wish . However , the Disability Income portion of Living Benefit policies is usually a rider for which you need to qualify , making that feature harder to get . Again , I 'd consider it a delightful challenge to help you get whatever is out there for you to get .
Yes , most people can get life insurance while having Multiple Sclerosis . As you know , there is such a wide range of symptoms , from virtually having no impairments , to having to be confined to bed . So the type of life insurance you can get with MS depends on your own situation . If you have relapsing remitting MS and are still able to work full time , you should be able to get a medically underwritten policy at a reasonable price . If you are at the other extreme of needing assistance with ADL 's , you can get guaranteed issue life insurance if you fit those age guidelines . It is important to use a life insurance agent that understands multiple sclerosis underwriting , and carries a wide range of products , to get your most affordable MS life insurance .
Most people with Multiple Sclerosis can get life insurance . If your MS is the relapsing remitting type with few effects and no recent exacerbations , you can usually get a medically underwritten policy for any amount you wish . If having one of the progressive types of multiple sclerosis , recent exacerbations , treatment that is being changed due to being in effective , or unable to walk or do ADL 's unassisted , you will need to take simplified or guaranteed issue coverage . But life insurance is still available for you if you fit the age requirements . To get life insurance while having MS , contact an agency that will ask these type of questions and know which company covers each scenario . It is easy to be quoted too strict -LRB- `` you have MS so no one will cover you '' -RRB- or too lenient -LRB- `` go ahead and take your chance on applying for this $ 1,000,000 policy even though you are taking Aricept '' -RRB- . Your policy will go much smoother and you will get the best possible price using agents who specialize in affordable MS life insurance .
You can get life insurance with MS , or Multiple Sclerosis , the vast majority of the time . Mild to moderate relapsing remitting MS can qualify for a medically underwritten policy , and there are simplified issue plans for advanced complications or progressive MS. If unable to do own ADL 's or in a wheelchair , guaranteed issue policies are available in most states , but those do have a minimum age of 40-50 years old . Medically underwritten policies are not graded , have no limit on face amount -LRB- except what you can financially afford and qualify for -RRB- , and cost less than most simplified or guaranteed issue policies . If you are able to work full time , or have minimal effects from your MS , you can get life insurance just like anyone else .
Most people can get life insurance if they have MS -LRB- Multiple Sclerosis -RRB- . Relapsing remitting MS with stable treatment over one year , no exacerbations for over a year , and few effects from the disease -LRB- able to work full time -RRB- will enable you to get the most affordable MS life insurance , possibly rated as good as Standard to Table 3 . If you have one of the types of Progressive Multiple Sclerosis , are in a wheelchair or unable to do your own ADL 's -LRB- Activities of Daily Living such as bathing or eating without the assistance of another person -RRB- , you will usually need to go with guaranteed issue life insurance . There are also a number of plans for persons with all types and severity of MS. Contact a good impaired risk agent who specializes in this type of coverage to cover the bases accurately and find your best rate .
Our agency specializes in life insurance for people with Multiple Sclerosis , and we find that they are often very discouraged by their experiences in trying to find get insurance . They say it is a breath of fresh air to talk to agents who understand their disease and know what options are available for each type of MS. So my number one answer to this question is yes , just make sure you go to someone who specializes in MS life insurance . Whether your MS is relapsing remitting or one of the progressive types will be the first indicator of whether you can get a medically underwritten policy . If progressive , there are a number of No Exam policies available . If in a wheelchair or needing help with ADL 's , guaranteed issue is the only choice . Relapsing remitting MS with minimal to moderate symptoms , stable and effective treatment , able to work -LRB- although being on DI will not matter in some cases -RRB- , and no large effect on memory will result in a policy rated Standard to table 4 with the carriers we find best for multiple sclerosis life insurance .
Two years ago I featured a week long series on Women Against MS on my daily financial talk show , The Business Insurance Zone . On one of the episodes , we outlined the stages of MS. The stages of MS are important to life insurance underwriters to categorize theunderwritingoffer . A preliminary discussion with a life insurance professional can help determine whether to seekcoverageand receive a non binding estimation of the cost .
People with MS can not get traditional long term care policies , but some people with multiple sclerosis can get life insurance policies with `` living benefits '' that will provide money for extended care needs . Also , there are riders on some traditional life insurance polices that allow the death benefit to be used for long term care type needs while the insured person is still alive . When MS is very mild , it may be possible to purchase a life insurance policy with that type of rider .
It is very difficult to get Long Term Care Insurance while having MS. Long Term Care Insurance companies are especially sensitive about insuring those who have health conditions that could develop into trouble with doing Activities of Daily Living independently . However , some long term care type riders on Life Insurance are allowed for a person with multiple sclerosis , and `` living benefit '' life insurance policies might also fill that need . Talk to an agency that specializes in life insurance for persons with MS to see your full range of options .
You can get health insurance with MS. Multiple Sclerosis is a serious disease with many complications . However , under the new ACA legislation , you will not be denied coverage because of the condition . Finding the best policy for your situation is critical and that 's why , as an experienced broker , we can find the best plans for you . Consumers that visit our website -LRB- see my profile -RRB- can compare top-rated plans and also qualify for a federal subsidy during Open Enrollment . The combination of medications and other treatment for MS is very expensive . There are several available plans that will reduce copays and deductibles and make treatment much less expensive . But the best part is that you do n't have to answer questions during OPen Enrollment to obtain quality coverage .
There are four basic types of multiple sclerosis -LRB- MS -RRB- : relapsing-remitting , primary-progressive , secondary-progressive , and progressive-relapsing . Obtaining coverage depends on your age of onset , the number of attacks , the latest attack , the treatment and medications youre on . Generally speaking , Standard issue for a nonsmoker is the best health classification is most mild cases of MS. Declination if you were just diagnosed within the last year .
Some Critical Insurance Illness policies do cover MS and some do not . You would need to review the features of your particular Critical Illness policy to see if it covers a diagnosis of Multiple Sclerosis . The MS can not be a pre-existing condition in order for it to be covered by the policy .
Some critical illness policies do cover MS , but not all of them . Look over the conditions covered to see if Multiple Sclerosis is listed , and also check to see if it is covered for 100 % of the benefit or if a diagnosis of MS would qualify you for a partial Critical Illness benefit .
Yes , a person with MS can get health insurance . Effective January 1 , 2014 all individual health insurance plans will no longer have preexisting condition issues . You should speak with an independent health insurance agent to discuss your needs and they will be able to show you plans from all the major carriers .
You can get Disability Insurance if you make an income and if you qualify medically . Some health conditions that would most likely cause a decline for disability insurance are rheumatoid arthritis , stroke , MS and other health conditions that might advance to the point of restricting someone from being able to perform their job . Some graded policies will accept health conditions with moderate risk , such as type 1 diabetes . Regular Disability policies will cover well controlled health conditions and just charge some extra . The risk involved in one 's job also makes a difference .
You should buy Disability Insurance when you realize that you or your family could not get by without your steady income . Like Life and Health insurance , Disability insurance is partially based on the health of the insured person , so it is also best to buy it before you have a health condition that would increase your chances of becoming disabled -LRB- e.g. MS or diabetes -RRB- .
Being rated for life insurance means that you had a table rating tacked onto your premium . Table ratings come in letters or numbers , with A to H , or 1 to 8 , being as high as they usually go , although it is possible to be rated up to table L or 12 with some medically underwritten companies and policies . Most commonly , each table rating will add 25 % to the Standard premium . Again , some companies use a different guideline for table ratings , and those differences can make a big difference in the price , with the savings -LRB- or extra cost -RRB- compounding as the table ratings get higher . Table ratings are just an assessment of risk and mortality , as are all health ratings given by life insurance underwriters . If approvals ended at Standard , many people would not be able to qualify for life insurance . Being able to get a rated policy enables many persons with MS , type 1 diabetes , Hepatitis C , and other health conditions to get a traditional life insurance policy of any type or amount . PS I just saw that there is additional information to this question . If your blood pressure or A1C run high , or if you have had complications from your diabetes or hypertension , it will not matter if you are only taking two pills per day . If , however , you have a history of good control with both , you may need to look at a different company to see if you can get a better rating .
In order to qualify to get a Long Term Care Insurance policy , you must fill out an application and take an exam . The application goes to underwriting where it is determined if your health is good enough to get approved . If it is , you are issued a LTC policy . Some health conditions that would cause a decline are AIDS , ALS , Alzheimers , dementia , kidney failure , liver cirrhosis , and Parkinsons . Certain mood disorders , moderate to severe arthritis , MS , advanced diabetes and/or heart disease , stroke , and other conditions that can lead to inability to care for one 's self are also potential hindrances to qualifying for Long Term Care Insurance . To find out whether you qualify for Long Term Care Insurance , call or visit an agent that carries several LTC choices and answer all their questions . It is much easier to find out ahead of time if you can not qualify , than it is to be declined later . This way you can also get the policy that has your best price if you do qualify .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Will Poor People Have To Buy Health Insurance ?
The new health care legislation requires everyone to obtain health insurance , but not everyone will pay for health insurance . Starting in 2014 the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act or Obamacare requires every American to have health care . You may not have to pay for health care in you economically demonstrate you can not pay by means testing . If you elect not to pay for health care , and by means testing can pay , youll be assessed a penalty at the time of filing your taxes .
If you have good health , that is always the best time to buy life insurance . It is cheaper when you have good health . If you have poor health , that is a good reason to buy life insurance . People with poor health need that protection . So good health or poor health , now is a good time to buy life insurance .
As Nancy Pelosi informed us , we wo n't exactly know until it all takes effect . The Affordable Care Act is still rolling out and the major changes start in January 2014 . Some things we do know , the insurance companies wo n't be able to decline or charge extra to people with poor health . That will definitely affect premiums for everyone . It will make premiums less affordable for people who were already paying for their own health insurance and DID health qualify . It will require a lot of people to buy health insurance that did n't buy it before . That part will be good for the insurance companies . It has required that they operate on a 20 % margin . This has caused them to tighten up and lay off thousands of salaried and hourly employees . Most likely in my opinion this is an experiment that is doomed to fail . Once it fails , the whole health insurance system will go to a single payer government run system exactly like Medicare . That will be an improvement over this . But it will be very , very expensive on our tax payers .
Any time is a good age to buy life insurance , if you have a need for life insurance . If you have poor health there will be fewer choices and the price will be higher . But persons with poor health often have a great a need for life insurance , and are relieved to find a product that can pay their loved ones more than they are able to save up for them .
The simple answer is : you should pay an amount that you can afford . People who buy life insurance with the last dollar in their monthly budget will end up dropping their policy when emergencies arise . Life insurance that is dropped is of no value at all . Setting aside an affordable amount to pay life insurance premiums will help ensure that your policy is active when needed . Also , many people feel that if they ca n't buy a large amount of life insurance , they will buy none at all . Who among us would not welcome an extra $ 10,000 of cash at the traumatic time of losing a loved one and trying to take time off work , arrange for a funeral , house relatives or travel to the location of the funeral ? It does not take a million dollar policy to show love for those who are left behind . Of course , premiums differ for different types of policies and different types of risk . If you are using your life insurance to provide income during retirement , it will take a much larger portion of your budget than if you are just funding your funeral . Also , life insurance for those who are older or of poorer health will cost more than life insurance for young , healthy persons . But there is also a greater chance of the death benefit being paid out sooner when the insured person is older or suffers from poor health . A licensed agent can help you look at your whole financial picture and pick out a policy that will meet your needs at an affordable cost .
If you have excellent health , you will get the cheapest term life insurance by using a company who prides themselves on having the best `` preferred '' rates . If you have poor health , your best rate may not be term at all , as not many companies offer term life insurance to those with poor health . I use the above examples to show how there is no one life insurance company that offers the cheapest rates for everyone . Contacting a broker will help you find the most affordable rate for you .
Life insurance should be purchased when your health is good , if possible . That is when you can get the lowest rates . However , many people are born with health conditions that prevent them from qualifying for the best rates , and many other people do not think of purchasing life insurance until a health scare arises . While they will pay more , that is no reason to avoid getting life insurance . If anything , persons with poor health need it more , and appreciate whatever protection they can leave their loved ones .
It depends on the state you live in but yes there are states that use credit as a rating factor . Some insurance companies charge more for poor credit than accidents or tickets . Why ? There is overwhelming data showing people with poor credit file more claims . Credit is a hot topic in the insurance industry and not everyone agrees with using credit but the bottom line , numbers do n't lie so more and more companies will adapt this practice .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
Everything mentioned above is correct . You need to also consider when selecting Life Insurance for somebody that 's older the underwriting process you 'll have to go through . Depending on the benefit amount , some companies have a nonmedical underwriting process . That means mom and dad do n't have to give a blood or urine sample . You 'll see these type of plans on TV . Yet be aware of what you 're buying . Most of the TV Brands do not have guaranteed level premiums for life , or the death benefit is n't paid in full for the first two years . Allow me to explain in more detail . These plans are often called final expense Life Insurance . Generally speaking there or two ways the benefits are paid out . If your parents or in overall good health , without a major event like a heart attack or cancer in the last two years , they should be eligible for what 's called an immediate benefit . Once the policies approved the death benefit is available the next day . The other type is called a graded benefit -LRB- or call date modified benefit in some cases -RRB- . Again , generally speaking , most of these plans have a limited payout the first two years of policy is in force . Some pay a percentage of the death benefit while others refund all your premiums plus an interest rate . These plans are great if mom and dad are in poor health . Some applications have zero medical questions . I often see where someone is sold a graded benefit when they could have received a level benefit with a different carrier . Underwriting is the key factor ! If your parents are in good health they may want to consider a fully underwritten policy . That typically includes a small medical exam . Think of it this way , the deeper the carrier looks into somebody 's health , the better their rate for the same benefit will be . Then there 's the whole question of what type of insurance to get . Whole Life -LRB- which is what the Final expense plans are -RRB- , Term , or Universal Life . The Orman 's and Ramsey 's of the world will tell you to buy nothing else than term . . ever , ever , ever ... . I 'm not going to debate that now . Just going to say they are hurting a lot of people with such narrow , cookie cutter advice . ALL life insurance types have a time & place . If you have further questions ... Reach out . Honored to help ... - gravy .
A person is too old to get life insurance when they pass age 90 . However , poor health or dementia can make someone uninsurable prior to that age . There are several No Exam policies that cover up to age 85 that are tolerant of poor health . The best thing is to call a life insurance agency and ask . Trying to do it by email or mail is difficult with life insurance for older ages , whereas 5 minutes on the phone or in person with an agent and you can have your answer .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Viaticals , or life settlements , are the vehicles by which persons can sell their life insurance policies . However , the type of life insurance policy that can be sold is extremely limited . The policy nearly always has to have cash value , and the health of the insured person must be poor enough that those purchasing the policy , expect them to die within a short period of time , so that they can cash in on it . If you are in poor health and have a life insurance policy that you can no longer afford to pay for , you might ask your children if they would pitch in to pay the premiums . Then make them at least partial beneficiaries . If you need cash , you might be able to borrow from the cash value . Some policies even have `` living benefits '' where you can take part of the insurance proceeds in cash if you become critically , chronically , or terminally ill . Selling your life insurance policy should be a last resort . But if you do , be sure to deal with a reputable life settlement company .
This depends upon your health and activities . If you are in good health and young , it can take as little as three days . If you are elderly and in poor health , it may take a month . The more doctors you have seen recently and the more medical procedures you have undergone recently , the longer it may take . This is why you want to buy life insurance as soon as you can , while you are still insurable . Thank you . GARY LANE .
The best time to get life insurance is while you are young and healthy , because the rates are lowest then . However , many people do not think of buying life insurance until they get older , and see that they were not able to save up what they thought they would . Or when they are diagnosed with an illness , and faced with their own mortality . The cost will be higher at an older age , but your years for needing the policy will be shorter . And if you have a controlled health condition , you may still find some reasonable rates . Age and poor health do not eliminate the need for life insurance , and there are policies available to almost everyone .
Yes , depending upon the circumstances and their rules and underwriting guidelines as they have fled them with your state 's Insurance Department . An application for coverage may be denied in some cases due to a poor loss history . Applications may also be denied if the property does not meet a company 's underwriting standards and is in poor repair .
What is the difference between Medicare and Medicaid ? Medicare is the health program that most Americans enter into at age 65 or later . It is a basic health plan that most people purchase additional coverage through a Medicare Supplement or Medicare Advantage program . Medicaid is our social safety net used to provide a base level of health insurance coverage to the poor and disadvantaged .
Long-term care insurance is probably not a great choice for the very wealthy or the very poor . The very wealthy can self-insure and the very poor would be strapped by the premiums . But for most of middle America , the very reail probability of needing long-term care at some point in their lives , and the very high cost of that care warrants very serious consideration of having a plan of long-term care a part of their portfolio . Medicare pays very little of the cost . Medicaid pays none of the cost if you have assets . And the stresses placed on family to provide that care when it ca n't be paid for are devastating . Talk to a long-term care insurance professional . And check out `` A Shopper 's Guide to Long-Term Care Insurance '' at WEBSITELINK
Not every car insurer is admitted to your state . What you really want is a list for your state . Having said that , please realize that your insurance commissioner exercises a great deal of control over the practices of any insurance company that they admit . You can trust most of them . Bigger doesnt necessarily mean better . The best company , handled by a poor agent is still a poor mix . Ask your colleagues , friends and neighbors and find out who they trust . It really is a local thing .
Where is the best place to buy life insurance ? In Washington state it would be my office of course ! ;-RRB- Actually the best place to buy life insurance can vary . It could be online , on the phone or at an office . What you 're looking for is a agent who can answer your questions in such a way that you understand it . The agents role is not to speak to you in such a way that you are left scratching your head later over what was said . Big words , fancy charts do not make a good agent . A good agent translates the information you want into a way you understand , a poor one speaks over your head and bluffs their way through . I knew of an agent who used to produce a boiler plate document that was about two pounds of paper , of which two pages were actually about the client . The rest was fluff . He made a lot of sales that way because the clients were impressed by the volume presented , not the quality of information . The best place to buy is the place that actually answers your questions in a way that you understand and reduces the background noise as best as possible .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Why Is Florida Home Insurance So High ?
some states have inordinate exposure to dangerous , even sever weather . The peninsula of Florida is exposed to tropical and hurricane conditions every year during the Atlantic hurricane season -LRB- June 1 to November 30 . -RRB- The history impact of these storms has devastating financial ramifications for personal property owners , resulting in higher home insurance premiums .
Sure you can . Let 's say you live in NY -LRB- your legal address -RRB- and have a vehicle registered in NY . You can purchase NY Personal Auto Insurance in any state where the agent/broker is licensed in/for NY anmd represents a carrier that is licensed in NY to sell NY PAP and will accep -LSB- NY business from the agent or broker . I have n't purchased insurance online , but I would guess the online site asks for your information including state of registration , legal address , etc. . If you purchase online you are acting as your own insurance broker -LRB- lots of luck unless you are a student of insurance ... -RRB- Another situation is if you are a legal resident of NY and have a seasonal home in Florida . You desire to have a car in Florida and wish to insure it in Florida . I would recommend checking with a Florida agent or broker how to do this . -LRB- Insurance is regulated by state - there is not a countrywide standard . -RRB- Many insurance carriers require you be a legal resident of the state to purchase auto insurance for that state . Some may let you obtain a Florida registration and plate and issue you a Florida auto insurance policy using either your NY legal address or your Florida seasonal address . No ` one answer fits all ' for this question . Checking with the state 's DMV is also required to find out their criteria for registration application .
There are several different reasons home insurance rates increase . Most carriers would probably tell you that at least a portion of their increases are linked to weather/natural disaster related claims increases over the past few years . I often hear from clients in Wisconsin -LRB- our location -RRB- thinking they should not have to pay more for insurance due to the carrier having more lossesfrom fires out west , or hurricanes on the coast.Clients say they did not have a claim so why should they pay more?This debate will rage on but I doubt much will change . Insurance carriers are a business and when they pay out more in claims , due to bad weather or what have you , they have to make up for the difference ; increasing premiums . They spread risk around to remain competetive , trying to balance out higher risk states/locationswith lower risk states/locations . Average premiums on a state to state level often reflect this -LRB- for example , Florida is often ranked number one for premium cost primarily due to the high risk of weather related claims -RRB- . Another common reason carriers provide for increasing prmeiumsis to keep pace with inflation , many policies offer inflation guard to keep pace with estimated values . What is the take away here ? Home insurance is WORTH IT ! Protect your home and investment , likely your most expensive one ! Talk to an independent agent today !
The cost of Home Insurance is based on the losses in your area . Extreme weather works in cycles , so a specific area will have several years of very severe storm losses , causing rates to go up . When that cycle ends the losses go down and so do the rates . Of course construction costs tend to trend up , as do the values of everything else , and insurance rates have to adjust to compensate , but without rate increases , insurance companies would not be able to afford to stay in business through the bad years . A great example of this is the state of Florida . After Hurricane Andrew , insurance companies were hit very hard . When they tried to raise rates the state passed legislation limiting rate increases . So , backed into a corner , many insurance companies went broke or pulled out of Florida . Consequently , the largest insurer in Florida is now the state of Florida -LRB- the taxpayers are on the hook for claims if another significant storm hits -RRB- . After several years of no severe storms , that trend is reversing with several insurance companies coming back into the state and the # of policies the state holds is decreasing .
There are several insurance companies in Florida that sell Medigap Plan F. Medigap Plan F , in Florida , will result in a pretty high premium compared to other states in the country . But if you do n't want to be bothered with co-insurance , co-payments or deductibles , then Plan F will meet your benefit needs . As a licensed independent agent in Florida , I can share with you the companies and Plan F rates that are available .
I can address this question specifically for Florida . The Florida Department of Motor Vehicles requires that you register your car within 10 days . That 's pretty fast and a lot of people find becoming a Florida resident to be a bit stressful . It is important to know that in order to register your car you have to have Florida insurance . Handle the insurance first and take that proof of coverage with you to register . If your insurance carrier writes auto in Florida , changing the policy can be as easy as a cancel/re-write . If you 're changing carriers , be prepared to answer all the necessary questions for your household ... Driver 's License , Date of Birth , SSN and the vehicle information ... VIN number . Your use of vehicle is also important . Many new Floridians are new retirees as well . Be sure to have the policy rated correctly ... as a retired person vs someone who commutes to a job . Depending on the county in Florida , a visit in person with the agent may be necessary to verify no prior damage to the vehicle . Related to this is the need to change your Driver 's License . Depending on what state you are moving from some additional documentation to prove your identity may be required . Be sure to check this out before making the trip to the DMV .
If you are looking for long-term care insurance in Florida , make sure you are dealing with an agent that has the proper certification . As Ms. Mace mentioned we have to be licensed to sell health insurance . In Florida , we also must take an additional class and pass the test to receive a certification to sell long-term care insurance . It is one of Florida 's ways of ensuring the customer is protected . I have my certification so if you are in North Florida please feel free to contact me : 3525145295 , cscottbannon@hotmail.com or PO Box 786 Keystone Heights FL 32656 . I would love to meet with you so we can individualize a plan of protection for you and your family . With much appreciation . To your prosperity .
Medicare Supplement Insurance in Florida is a fraction of the cost of what you would spend on medical bills over the course of your lifetime . Considering that Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs . You are on the hook for the other 20 % unless you have a Medicare Supplement . In Florida , the premiums can vary widely from North Florida to South Florida . An independent agent that specializes in Medicare Supplement Insurance will be able to show you everything that is available to you and help match the plan that fits your specific needs . Visit our website at SummitMedigap.com to compare Florida Medicare Supplement plans instantly online . We are also happy to help answer any questions you have at 1-888-407-8664 .
In Florida , the best Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- Plan will depend on your individual needs . Across the United States , Medigap Plans are standardized -LRB- plans have same benefits regardless of insurance carrier -RRB- . Not only can you use your plan benefits in Florida but anywhere in the U.S. as long as the provider accepts Medicare . Plan F is very popular because it covers all Medicare approved charges . But that does not mean it is the best plan for everyone . Plan F is the most expensive plan and Florida 's rates are among the highest in the country , and even though you can use your Medigap Plan outside of the state , you still have to buy the Plan in Florida if it 's where you reside . There are a couple other popular plans with lower premiums if you do n't mind small co-pays , co-insurance or meeting the Part B deductible . As a licensed independent agent in Florida , I can share with you the Plans that are available in your area . Since Medigap Plans are standardized , once you determine which Medicare Supplement insurance benefits you want then the next step is finding the premium that meets your budget . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Most states , and I believe Florida is included in this , require that you show proof of auto insurance issued in that state in order to register your car . So if you live elsewhere and are in Florida only part of the year , ask your Insurance Professional for a referral to a Florida agent if yours is not already licensed there .
You know ... I have a friend who works tireless hours to receive government benefits . One may wonder why he does n't get a job ?! Anyways , there are many moving parts in Fixed -LRB- Indexed -RRB- Annuities . -LRB- FA -RRB- But ` Do they work ' is a tad broad . Here are a few questions you may want to know , before moving forward with a FA : - Why are you thinking about a FA ? - What do you wish to accomplish ? - Do you need income now , later , forever -LRB- so long as you shall live -RRB- - with a spouse , or it for something else ? - Is liquidity -LRB- without penalty -RRB- an immediate concern ? - Is long term growth with protection of principal your primary goal ? Get where I 'm going with this ? In the world of FAs , there are many moving parts and many options . Did you know that Texas and Florida are the only two states in the US that have added protective benefits , built into annuities ? Point being , a good Agent / Advisor will take the time to do a thorough needs analysis to determine what you seek , if a FA suits your needs and if applicable show you two or three options and let you choose what YOU believe is best for you . Just my two-cents !
It really depends on the State you live in and the Company you are dealing with . In Florida , you can put your children , spouses and significant others on a Florida Blue plan . But ... if you go through the Government Subsidy , that 's a whole different story . Depending on the level of subsidy , the children may have to go on Florida Kid Care and significant others would have to go on a different policy .
I do n't know about homeowner policy availability through AAA in every State but I can speak personally for Florida . They are my homeowner carrier in Florida . Their rate was reasonably competitive and the coverages are good . The customer service was great . Therefore , since Florida is one of the least favorite States for top insurers to do business in , I would think that the chances are good they are available in most States . If you are an AAA Member , you have a chance to get a good carrier .
The average cost of Medigap Insurance will depend on your age , what state you live in , your smoking status and which Medigap Insurance Plan you have . Medigap Plans can range between $ 75 per month to $ 500 per month depending on those factors . The average cost of Medigap Insurance will be different in different states . For example , Texas , South Carolina , North Carolina and Colorado are usually less expensive than South Florida . However , North Florida will generally be less expensive than South Florida . Work with an independent agent to shop the market for you and find you the best plan for the least amount of premium that matches your specific needs . For more information you can visit our website or give me a call . I would be happy to answer any questions for you .
Definitely depends on the state . Here are the Top 5 southern states average home insurance premiums Texas $ 1,560 Louisiana $ 1,546 Florida $ 1,544 Oklahoma $ 1,246 Mississippi $ 1,217 I believe as of this writing Florida has taken over as the highest average premium in the United States .
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
HMO stands for Health Maintenance Organization . When you are in an HMO you must stay in a network of doctors and health care providers , otherwise you are not covered unless you have an emergency . When selecting your Medicare Advantage Plan it is crucial that you make sure your doctors and hospitals are in your network . Also if you travel outside of your area for a few months out of the year , many Ohio residents have homes in Florida , for example and live in Florida during the winter , make sure your plan has a program that will allow you move your network to that state . United Healthcare and Aetna have such programs .
The largest by a significant margin is State Farm which has more than 20 % of the market in terms of written premium . Industry figures from 2012 indicate a total of $ 15 billion in premium . -LRB- That 's not property values - That 's premium ! -RRB- The next closest is Allstate at about 10 % of the market . The next eight carriers of the top ten , each having no more than 3 % or so of the market , are : Farmers ; Liberty Mutual ; USAA , Travelers ; Nationwide ; Chubb ; Citizens and American Family . Here in Florida , if you can be insured with any of these carriers , with the exception of Citizens , you have a strong National company behind you , in the event of losses . Many of them do not write in Florida , especially if coverage for the peril of wind is included .
Progress does offer mobile home insurance . Their coverages and prices are usually very good . Progressive only offers mobile home insurance through independent agents in 8 states : Illinois , Indiana , Iowa , Minnesota , Missouri , Nebraska , Ohio and Wisconsin . However , you can buy Progressive mobile home insurance directly from Progressive in every state except Alaska , Florida , Hawaii and D.C. .
Yes , health insurance is mandatory in the state of Florida or risk paying a fine . The affordable care act states that by January 1 , 2014 people are required to have health insurance or pay a fine . This rule is not just for Florida but for all states . An independent insurance agent should be able to show you plans from most of the major carriers and help you pick that plan that fits your needs . Several independent agencies -LRB- like ours -RRB- have a website that people can instantly compare health insurance plans online and then ask questions to experienced licensed agents over the phone .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How To Get Medicare At Age 62 ?
You can indeed qualify for Medicare at age 62 ... as long as you are totally and permanently disabled under Social Security rules . If you have been disabled and on SSDI for 2 years you qualify for Medicare . If you have ESRD or ALS you can also qualify for SSDI and Medicare at age 62
$ 250,000 of 20 year Term life insurance for a very healthy 62 year old male will run between $ 150 to $ 250 per month . At age 62 , selecting a shorter term will cut the rate down drastically . However , to get a term length beyond 30 year Term is very rare at age 62 . To get longer coverage , you most likely have to take Universal Life with a guarantee to not lapse before a certain age . Unless you absolutely know that you will only need your policy for a limited number of years , taking the Universal Life option is a much safer way to go . If you were to buy a 20 year Term policy , get cancer at age 81 , and then live to age 85 , you most likely will be unable to afford the annually renewable premiums AND be unable to qualify for the amount of life insurance you want . If you can qualify for Preferred rates at age 62 , chances are you are going to live a long time . It is easier to lock your rate in for a long time now , than it will be to get a new , affordable policy when the term runs out . So do n't cheat yourself ; get a policy that will still be in effect when you die .
You can get Medicare if you have never worked if : 1 -RRB- You are a US citizen , have lived in the US for at least 5 continuous years , take both Medicare A and B , and pay the appropriate premium for Medicare Part A -LRB- up to $ 441/month in 2013 -RRB- ; or 2 -RRB- You are the spouse of a an eligible worker who is at least age 62 -LRB- for Part A ; you can enroll in Part B before your eligible spouse turns age 62 -RRB- ; 3 -RRB- Miscellaneous other circumstances .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
You can indeed qualify for Medicare at age 62 ... as long as you are totally and permanently disabled under Social Security rules . If you have been disabled and on SSDI for 2 years you qualify for Medicare . If you have ESRD or ALS you can also qualify for SSDI and Medicare at age 62
If you are age 65 when you receive Social Security benefits , you will automatically be signed up for Medicare at age 65 . If you are not yet receiving Social Security benefits , you can still sign up for Medicare benefits at age 65 . When relying on your spouse 's eligibility , you can get Medicare at age 65 if your spouse is at least age 62 .
If you are 65 or older , you can get Medicare Part A if you have n't worked , as long as your spouse or divorced spouse has worked enough hours to receive Medicare , and if your spouse or divorced spouse is at least age 62 . Also , you can get Medicare if you get Social Security . Getting Social Security benefits only requires a 10 year work history for you or a spouse , or less if the employed spouse dies at a very young age . There are some other caveats dealing with SSDI , railroad , kidney failure and more . See WEBSITELINK for more details .
Medicare is not optional to start at age 62 , as Social Security is . You can only get it at age 65 unless there is another reason for getting it before age 65 . Those reasons are : having end stage renal disease , being on Social Security Disability for 24 months , or having Lou Gehrig 's Disease .
If you are receiving Medicare and your spouse turns 65 , he/she can go on Medicare even if they have not paid Medicare taxes the required 40 quarters , due to being a stay at home worker or some other reason . If you have paid into Medicare but are not yet on Medicare , your spouse has not paid into Medicare , and your spouse turns 65 , he/she can receive Medicare if you are age 62 or older .
That is a great question ! The Medicare system was set up so that everyone could qualify for it , once they turned 65 years of age . There are no restrictions as to your health status - if you are perfectly healthy you qualify , if you have cancer you qualify . The age limitation is pretty solid though . You mentioned that you started taking your Social Security benefits at age 62 , and if you did so because of a disability that required retirement and early benefits , and have been steadily taking those disability benefits since then you may qualify for the early Medicare exemption . To qualify for it , you will have had to have continuously pulled benefits for two years , and you have passed that mark if so . If not , I 'm sorry to say that they are pretty strict about the age requirement , and you will be unable to sign up until you turn 65 . Good luck , and thank you for asking !
You must be age 65 to qualify for Medicare , with a few exceptions . Without elaboration , the main exceptions are : 1 -RRB- being on Social Security Disability for two years -LRB- so if you go on SSDI at age 62 or earlier , you will be able to go on Medicare before age 65 -RRB- , 2 -RRB- having end stage renal disease , or 3 -RRB- having Lou Gehrig 's disease .
Your current medical history does n't affect whether or not you would qualify for Medicare . In general , you must be 65 years or older to sign up for Medicare Part A & Part B . At age 62 , you would not be able to qualify for Medicare as you 're too young for the program - the only exception is if you are receiving social security disability benefits for more than 24 continuous months . If you 're receiving social security disability benefits , but have not met the 24 month rule , then you would not be eligible for Medicare . Please note , when you 're new to Medicare Part A and Part B , you activate a 6-month initial open enrollment period to also buy a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- with NO medical underwriting - meaning even with hep C , you can get one . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan . After your initial open enrollment period expires , you would be subject to medical questions for any Medigap plan . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any questions or need help with your Medicare Supplement coverage - you can reach me via the `` contact me '' button next to my picture . Thanks very much .
You can only go on Medicare at age 62 if : 1 -RRB- you have been receiving Social Security Disability Income -LRB- SSDI -RRB- benefits for two years , or 2 -RRB- if you have been diagnosed with End Stage Renal Disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- and meet the other qualifying criteria , or 3 -RRB- you have been diagnosed with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis -LRB- ALS -RRB- . Otherwise , you must wait until you are age 65 to go on Medicare .
If you have family history with a disposition for chronic illness or disease before age 50 , you should consider long term care insurance -LRB- LTCI -RRB- . You should start seriously reviewing the half dozen LTC contracts at age 50 and purchase LTCi while youre healthy and the premiums are inexpensive . But dont delay to purchase LTCi beyond age 62 .
The cost of one million dollars worth of life insurance depends on the length of coverage : term life insurance from 5-30 years or permanent life insurance to age 121 . But it also depends on your gender , age , smoking status , health history , current medical condition and whether the coverage is one one life or two . A million dollars of 20 year term life insurance on a male non smoker age 62 is around $ 10,000 annually .
If you are 62 and in good health , with no chronic diseases and no significant medications , or restrictions , you should be able to get term life insurance . The rate will depend on the amount of coverage you want in dollars and the length of time it want that coverage to remain at a level premium . The longer the period , or the coverage , the higher the premium will be . If you want the longest , you should be able to get coverage to age 80 , or perhaps 82 with some companies . You should also be able to get coverage for $ 250k , or 500K with 1M being not likely . You probably will find a policy you are happy with for around $ 250 a month if your health is good . Thank you . GARY LANE .
Conventional wisdom is no later than age 50 when the potential morbidity events begin to increase and at age 62 for price considerations . Establishing a long term care insurance policy is part of defensive retirement planning and should be a high priority based on life expectancy and the average cost fo extended care during your senior years .
Most financial advisers start addressing long term care insurance at age 50 . But the purchasing trends of long term care insurance are age 62 . Its critical to purchase long term care insurance when you healthy and young enough to pay reasonable premiums for coverage , especially if your family has a predisposition for extended care confinement .
There are schools of thought that purchasing long term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- early on when youre healthy is the ideal time to buy LTCi . Conventional wisdom is no later than age 50 when the potential morbidity events begin to increase and at age 62 for price considerations . Establishing a long term care insurance policy is part of defensive retirement planning and should be a high priority based on life expectancy and the average cost for extended care during your senior years .
There 's many factors that go into the costs for term life insurance to say what an average plan costs - it will be different for every person due to a number of factors including their age , amount of coverage they want , how long they want the coverage for -LRB- , their risk classifcation , and whether they 're applying with full underwriting or non-medical term coverage . At age 62 , you 'll have term life insurance options for 10 , 15 , 20 , or 25 years - 30 years term insurance would not be available due to age - you would need to look at permanent programs to secure coverage longer than 25 years . If you want to consider coverage beyond 25 years , I would suggest looking at a Guaranteed Universal Life insurance policy -LRB- GUL -RRB- If you 're looking for something in the $ 100,000 , 10yr term insurance range , you could be looking at premiums of about $ 35 per month to over $ 100 + per month . $ 250,000 , 15 yr term can be as low as $ 103 per month . So on and so forth . However , any numbers I quote without more details regarding your medical history will be useless . The risk classification is the MOST critical factor in determining the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- of a life insurance policy . The risk class depends on a number of factors including whether you 're male or female , your medical history , height/weight profile , any tobacco usage , and other factors . Please keep in mind - every carrier has their own set of underwriting guidelines and mortality tables , and each may offer a different risk class for a given medical profile - e.g. company A may offer preferred -LRB- featuring lower rates -RRB- and company B may only offer standard -LRB- featuring higher rates -RRB- . Consulting with an experienced life insurance broker would be the best course of action . Brokers can shop the case for you among a number of carrier to see which one will work best for your program and help you structure a policy that will best serve your needs and your budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
annuities
When Are Annuities Paid ?
With the exception of single premium immediate annuities and deferred annuities that are annuitized for the life of the annuitant , annuities generally have maturity contract dates or time certain periods . Annuities contracts that mature can either rollover to another contract period , 1035 exchange to another annuity or take some form of distributions .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
The different kinds of annuities have not just one , but a variety of features that make them different . Here are some of them . Keep in mind that each annuity will have a combination of these differing features . 1 -RRB- Immediate vs Deferred . Immediate annuities are often single premium annuities and they begin making payments to the beneficiary almost immediately . Deferred annuities are often paid periodically , although they can also be paid in a single premium . Deferred annuities are not annuitized until after an extended accumulation period . 2 -RRB- Single Premium or Multiple Premium . 3 -RRB- Fixed , Indexed , or Variable . Fixed annuities have a guaranteed minimum interest rate that is paid on the premium paid for the annuity . Indexed annuities have a base interest rate but can perform above that through the use of market indexes . Variable annuities are invested in the stock or other markets and may or may not have guarantees .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
When you are looking at starting an annuity there are two types of money that can be used . There is qualified , money that you have n't paid taxes on like a 401k that was funded with pre-tax dollars . When you start taking distributions from an annuity funded with qualified money , you will have to pay takes on the principal and the interest that was earned . With non-qualified money , money that you already paid taxes on like money from a saving or checking account , when you start taking distribution you will only pay taxed on the interest that was earned . Now there are also two different types of annuities deferred and immediate . A deferred means that there is a waited period before you can start taking distributions or immediate meaning that once that annuity is in affect you can immediately start taking distributions . So a non qualified immediate annuity means that the money being used to fund it has already been taxed and once the annuity is approved you can immediately start taking an income . When looking at annuities make sure that you shop around with a broker that represent multiple annuities . You may want to look at some that offer an income bonus and or a life time income .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
This depends on what is happening with the annuity when someone dies and what type of annuity -LRB- owner or annuitant driven -RRB- we 're talking about . For an annuity that is not paying income and the owner is the annuitant -LRB- i.e. the type of contract wo n't matter -RRB- , the cash value of the annuity will be paid to the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- in the contract . If the annuity have been annuitized -LRB- i.e. is paying an income stream -RRB- the chosen option will determine what happens . For life only annuity payments , the payments will stop and no further money will be paid out . For period certain annuities , the income will continue until the period certain has ended . For life with a refund -LRB- installment or lump sum cash -RRB- than the refund will pay the the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- until the cash value of the annuity has been paid out in full to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
What happens to an annuity upon death depends on the type of annuity you have and the contractual stipulations . If you have an annuity that was set up to pay out for the rest of your life , there may be not benefit paid upon your death . Some Life Annuities will return what was paid in or pay for a guaranteed number of years . A Joint with Last Survivor Annuity will continue payments to the spouse . For annuities that will are set up to pay a fixed number of years , annuity payments will continue to the beneficiaries just as if they did before . If the annuity was not yet annuitized , the proceeds must be received by the beneficiaries within 5 years . Contact your agent or the company through which your annuity was secured to understand the specifics about your particular contract .
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
An annuity is two things : 1 -RRB- It is a systematic way to accumulate money ; and 2 -RRB- It is a systematic way to distribute -LRB- pay out -RRB- money . When you evaluate the options , these two functions are primary to understanding what you are looking at with any annuity . I will confine my answer to helping set the table for you to be able to compare one annuity to another . As a method of systematically accumulating money in an account , you need to be at work but your money also needs to be at work . The interest rate paid on your growing fund accumulation is how your money is considered to be working for you so one of the most important things to compare would be the rate of interest to be paid on your accumulations . Ask and know if there is a minimum rate of return . Beware : Proposals can propose rates of interest to be paid that may never come true so understanding the minimum rate of interest helps . It may also help to compare the performance of the annuity in terms of interest rate paid over time . Good companies can provide you a historical log of the rates they have paid on their accounts . You should also understand what the penalties to the interest accumulation occur when your decide to move the money to another provider . These are referred to as surrender charges or early termination fees . Commonly there are surrender charges for five to seven years so you should ask and know how you will be treated if you decide to move your money into another direction . Also , ask what other charges your account may be subjected to during the life of the annuity prior to making any distribution choices . Years from now you will have choices as you decide how to turn your accumulated account into a stream of payments -LRB- or outright surrender -RRB- . If you choose to surrender the account , know and understand what types of surrender fees might apply . Do n't forget , you 'll probably face a sizable taxable event if you surrender the account for cash on the gain above basis in your account . Legitimate rollover of the funds can avoid the tax and penalties under most circumstances . Depending on the type of annuity , all the money may be subject to taxation and if you surrender prior to 591/2 years of age , there is a 10 % surtax collected by the government above and beyond all other tax calculations . Now , if you `` annuitize '' the account with the carrier handling your account , you are choosing to leave it with your annuity provider for the promise of a periodic stream of payments into the future . In most instances , once the account is annuitized , it can no longer be surrendered for cash . At this point you have selected a stream of payments for some period of time and based upon certain events in your life or your spouse , and based upon an assumed interest rate . These funds , as they are paid out , will also earn additional interest gains that are considered into the payout formula before determining the value of each monthly installment distributed to you from your account . This interest rate is usually fixed but modern variations do exist to have the interest rate move with market changes . Generally , the payout period is your lifetime , often with a minimum period of ten years . It can be longer if chosen . This would lower the monthly periodic installments because of the longer guarantee . You may also choose to have the annuity pay beyond your life and for the life of a spouse and this will further reduce the monthly payout because it is based upon a longer life expectancy of two lives . The topic of distribution is too involved to provide much meaningful help but this should help you spur a reasonable conversation about annuities and help you compare one to another .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
A life insurance policy is paid up when all required annual premiums have been paid . If the policy is a `` whole life paid up at age 95 '' contract , the policy is paid up at age 95 . It is important to note that the term `` paid up '' is often misused . In whole life policies that pay policy dividends , the dividend values are frequently used to buy `` paid up additions '' which are paid up , additional amounts of insurance that have cash value and add to the base policy . The cash value of paid up additions may be projected , based on the current dividend scale , to grow to a point in the future where those values may be used to premiums on the base policy . The policy is not paid up when the policy owner pays premiums this way .
Yes , annuities can be inherited . When the annuity is inherited during the annuitization stage , the recipients of the annuity payments will need to pay income tax on the payments according to the tax bracket they are in . The annuity must be the type of annuity that is paid out for a certain period and not the lifetime income annuity ; otherwise , the annuity payments would end when the annuitant 's life ended .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
In Canada annuities there are two main types of annuities : accumulation annuities and payout annuities . If they are issued by an insurance company they can/do include maturity & death benefit guarantees , potential creditor proofing , estate bypass -LRB- privacy and costs -RRB- and more . They are used extensively by retirement and estate planners . The topic of annuities with all our industry jargon is indeed confusing . Experience has taught me that an understanding the basics is the key step . 1 . An accumulation annuity is as the name suggests is used to save money , a payout annuity option is included as part of the contract . There are two main types of accumulation annuities : Guaranteed Interest Annuity -LRB- GIA -RRB- - principle is guaranteed and interest is earned similar to a GIC Guaranteed Investment Fund -LRB- GIF -RRB- - similar to a mutual fund , the principle is at risk , however , with maturity and death benefit guarantees , etc. . In Canada , they are also referred to a segregated funds or variable annuities . 2 . Payout Annuities , you exchange a sum of money for a flow of income . There are many variations with different guarantees but the basic two types are : Annuity certain , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for a specified number of years . Life annuity , where in exchange for a lump sum of money you receive a guaranteed income for the rest of your life or with a joint life . These are usually purchased with a guarantee payment period . The more guarantees , the lower the income . To understand an annuity , first understand a mortgage . With a mortgage you receive a lump sum of money and pay back principal and interest over a specified term until the balance is zero . With a payout annuity certain you are at the opposite side of the equation , you exchange a lump sum of money for a guaranteed income stream for a specified term . You will find 16 `` I want to ... How do I '' , that illustrates some strategies using annuities on www.jpw.ca Annuity strategies can be complicated . It is your money and you would be prudent work a life insurance broker with a professional designation like a CLU -LRB- Chartered Life Underwriter -RRB- or a CFP -LRB- Certified Financial Planner -RRB- . If you have further questions please contact me . Paul
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Does Auto Insurance Work ?
That is a great question ! Auto insurance is designed to protect you from a number of potential risks . Every driver is expected to have insurance before getting behind the wheel , and the penalties for not doing so are pretty stiff . The costs of the policies can vary widely , based on the coverage package and the amount of deductible that you choose . Thanks for asking !
An auto policy is a package of coverages . The customer can select all or some of the coverages available . The most important coverage is public liability and property damage . Your state probably requires this coverage on every car using the public roads , but since not everyone obeys the law there is another section of coverages for uninsured and underinsured drives coverage in case you are in a collision with someone without insurance or with inadequate insurance . Another major section is physical damage . Your lender usually requires that you carry this coverage . It restores your car after you pay the deductible for a wide range of events . There are additional coverages and services that are frequently included in the policy but these are the main coverages .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
The short answer is , `` usually not . '' Commercial auto policies are in place to provide liability and collision coverage for work related vehicles . Insurance companies view commercial autos as instruments necessary for work , which means they will be used on a daily basis . This means there will be more driving and greater exposure . Think about it this way , when you are getting personal auto insurance the insurance company will ask what is the purpose of having your vehicle and how far will you be driving . For commercial auto policies it is assumed this will be increased . I hope this helps .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover your auto while in the garage . Homeowners insurance covers the home and not autos . Only your auto insurance policy can protect your auto while in the garage . If you have an auto you do not drive and just store in your garage I would recommend purchasing comprehensive coverage only on your auto .
What is business use auto insurance ? When you ask a company for a quote , they will ask you how you use your vehicle . the most common uses are : to work -LRB- commute to an office -RRB- and how far . Pleasure use -LRB- non-working drives to the store and such -RRB- . Business use -LRB- drives vehicle in the course of daily business , such as outside salesmen . -RRB- Generally the more frequently you are on the road the more a auto insurance carrier will charge for coverage .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
Nearly all carriers use credit in underwriting . The only variable is what sorts of events they rate on and how important it is to the rating process . Many will overlook credit , although Effective Coverage works with at least one auto insurance company in Texas who does not do a credit check for auto insurance .
How does health insurance work while on disability ? Since I just ended 12 months of disability that included many hospitalizations and treatments , I can tell you it works exactly the same as not being disabled . Disability insurance protects your income , health insurance protects your health . You can have both going on at once . Depending on your employment situation , how your health insurance is paid for may make a difference . Maybe your employer continues to pick it up , maybe it 's covered under workman 's comp , maybe you pay your own premiums . . the main thing is health insurance does n't go away if you 're collecting disability insurance .
The General is a nonstandard auto insurance company , so you should only consider The General if you do n't qualify for standard auto insurance , due to your driving record or other factors . Like with any auto insurance company , some drivers in some states or zip codes may find The General has the best price for them , but other people may find much lower rates with other nonstandard auto insurance companies . Compare The General with GEICO , Progressive , Infinity , andlocal independent insurance agents selling nonstandard auto insurance near you . Check your phone book : agents sellingnonstandard auto insurance usually advertise about insuring people with no prior insurance , needing SR-22s , or havingtickets and/or accidents .
I 'm afraid you have confused what comprehensive insurance means . In regards to comprehensive insurance , `` comprehensive '' is a component of auto insurance , but not a type of insurance . comprehensive coverage protects your vehicle from losses that occur by means other than collision . Examples include theft , vandalism , weather damage , hitting a deer , etc. . As far as borrowing someone else 's vehicle , your auto insurance does n't cover you . Their insurance does . That is , auto insurance always follows the vehicle , not the driver .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
In addition to losing your license and visiting your local jail , you could subject yourself to financial ruin by not carrying auto insurance . The primary purpose of auto insurance is to protect yourself and others in the event of an accident . The vehicle itself should really be the least of your concerns . Dependent upon the circumstances , auto insurance could provide you coverage for injuries sustained by you . your passengers and others involved in the accident . Additionally , auto insurance could provide you with legal defense in the event you are sued . These are only some of the consequences you could face by not carrying adequate auto insurance . That 's why it is important to have an agent you can trust where you can sit down to discuss how to best protect yourself .
401K plans have been one of the primary ways people who work save for retirement . It is what is known as a qualified plan meaning that it is subject to government enforced rules and regulations regarding how money goes into it , how much can go in , how it comes out and how much at one time . Employers offer these plans and agree to put in a certain amount -LRB- in some cases , not all -RRB- so that an employee can grow their nest egg while working . The funds grow tax deferred -LRB- no taxes due till funds are distributed to employee -RRB- , typically have options as to where you will invest them and traditionally accumulate over time . You can ask your employer about their 401K plan if they offer one . You usually have to work with them for a few months or a year before you beome eligible to join .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Can I Get Health Insurance With A Pre Existing Condition In Texas ?
Starting January 1 , 2014 , pre-existing conditions will no longer be an issue . You can begin looking at plans now with an effective date of 1/1/14 . Also , depending on what the condition is you may be able to look at getting a plan now because not all pre-existing conditions are equal . An independent agent should be able to show you plans from several different top rated carriers .
You can get Long Term Care with some pre-existing conditions , but not all of them . Some types of pre-existing conditions are viewed by long term care underwriters as more apt to need long term care in the future than others . Some of these are stroke , MS , diabetes with side effects , dementia , and rheumatoid arthritis . These can cause a decline . Osteoporosis , depression , and other mild conditions can affect ratings and price . On the other hand , some pre-existing conditions that can cause a decline for life insurance will not affect long term care insurance at all . Contact a broker who carries a variety of long term care choices to see if your pre-existing condition will enable you to buy a long term care insurance policy at an affordable price .
As of January 1 , 2014 all major medical insurance plans , both individual and group , can no longer have any exclusions , limitations or waiting periods for pre-existing health conditions . So , from that perspective it is not a matter of which health insurance accepts pre-existing conditions . Any health insurance plan in compliance with the Affordable Care Act has to . Now , there are Short Term Major Medical policies and some limited benefit and/or indemnity type policies out there that can still apply underwriting and can limit or exclude pre-existing conditions but these are not major medical health insurance plans that meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- . In some instances people are marketing these types of products as a low cost alternative to ACA compliant health insurance plans . They provide you with some degree of financial protection but they will not shield you from the Individual Mandate tax penalty or provide you with comprehensive coverage . If you are offered a policy that does not cover pre-existing conditions that is a red flag that someone is trying to sell you a non-compliant policy - BUYER BEWARE .
Health insurance for one person in Texas can cost as little as $ 25 - $ 40 per month -LRB- short-term plan -RRB- or much more , depending on the age of the person to be covered , their zip code and what medical conditions -LRB- if any -RRB- that they have . Shopping and comparing the major carriers will always save money . As an experienced broker , our job is to do the shopping for you . We take your information and quickly provide the companies in your area that will offer the lowest rates . It 's that simple . Starting in October -LRB- 2013 -RRB- , Open Enrollment will begin and many affordable plans will become available to Texans that have pre-existing conditions . A federal tax subsidy will be available -LRB- depending on your family income -RRB- that could potentially pay a large portion of your premium .
Any true major medical insurance policy , group or individual , should cover treatment for Lupus as it is an autoimmune disease in the same class as arthritis . Perhaps a person who was issued an individual health insurance policy that was grandfathered under the terms of the health care reform law was issued coverage excluding Lupus as a condition of issuing the coverage but that 's about the only context I can think of where this question could arise . Certainly in the era of health care reform , especially after January 1 , 2014 , coverage for conditions such as Lupus should not be a big point of discussion . No policy issued after that date can have pre-existing condition exclusions or limitations . That being said , how treatment for conditions such as Lupus are handled from a level of coverage perspective can and do vary from one insurance carrier to the next . First of all , your perception of coverage may be affected by the type of policy you have enrolled in . If you enrolled in a policy with a $ 6000 deductible then your perception might be that your condition is n't being covered when actually it is but you are n't seeing any benefits until you 've met your deductible . In other cases your insurance carrier may have treatment protocols in place that guide your physician on the methods of treatment and types of medications that must be adhered to for treatment of such a condition and these may be a departure from your past experience and usage . If you are covered under a non-compliant health plan , possibly a limited benefit or indemnity type plan , then it is quite likely you would have little or no coverage for Lupus or be subject to pre-existing condition exclusions and/or waiting periods . Short Term Medical policies , which by nature do not cover pre-existing conditions , are also another possible area where a person could find that Lupus would not be covered . But , in today 's environment , a person suffering from Lupus can get major medical coverage that covers their condition .
Private health insurance covers pre-existing conditions ... most of the time ! I 'll explain : When applying for coverage during Open Enrollment -LRB- assuming it is a qualified Exchange or Off-Exchange plan -RRB- , pre-existing conditions are covered and there will be no waiting period or surcharge applied . As an experienced health insurance broker -LRB- 33 years -RRB- , this issue is often discussed with customers and on our top-ranked websites . However , non-compliant plans , such as short-term policies , do not cover pre-existing conditions . If you miss Open Enrollment , these temporary plans are popular options .
Pre-Existing Conditions are no longer an issue . The issue is now Open Enrollment . Let me explain . The Affordable Care Act made pre-existing conditions obsolete ; you can get health insurance no matter what condition you may have . However , you must buy health insurance during open enrollment , which ended April 15th . Now you ca n't get individual health insurance until January 1 , 2015 -LRB- open enrollment starts again November 15th -RRB- . There are certain exceptions that will allow you to get health insurance outside open enrollment such as the loss of employer coverage , marriage , divorce , etc. .
No and yes . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- anyone applying for major medical health insurance coverage after January 1 , 2014 can not be denied coverage for a pre-existing health condition . Insurance coverage is guaranteed to be issued and must cover pre-existing conditions immediately . However , this does require that you enroll for individual health insurance coverage during the mandated open enrollment period which for 2014 ended on March 31st . If you failed to enroll during the open enrollment period then you can not apply for major medical insurance coverage until the next open enrollment period which begins on November 15th for an effective date of coverage of January 1 , 2015 at the earliest . The only exceptions to this part of the law are for what are referred to as `` Change of Life Status Events '' such as marriage , divorce , losing other health insurance coverage , or having or adopting a child -LRB- as the most common examples -RRB- . For the remainder of 2014 the only options available to persons who failed to enroll during the open enrollment period would be Short Term Medical insurance or perhaps a limited benefit/indemnity policy . However , these policies do still have some underwriting question associated with them that could result in your being declined for coverage . Also , these types of health plans do not cover pre-existing health conditions and do not meet the criteria under the Affordable Care Act for being major medical coverage . Therefore , you would be subject to the individual mandate tax penalty even if you do take out one of these types of policies .
That depends entirely upon what the pre-existing condition is and it 's likelihood of causing a person to become disabled . Something like common allergies would technically be a pre-existing condition but just because you may need allergy shots it is highly unlikely that such a condition would be an issue . Now , if you 've had a mild stroke and have a family history of heart disease then you are in a situation where qualifying for disability insurance would be much more difficult , if not impossible , in the individual market . Some disability insurance carriers will issue coverage that might exclude coverage if the disability is a result of the pre-existing condition . And some employer groups offer group disability coverage to their employees that may be guaranteed to be issued as least up to certain levels of financial coverage .
This will all change very soon as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 -LRB- PPACA aka Obamacare -RRB- takes effect , but for now this very much depends on if you allow your health insurance coverage to lapse . If you do not lapse coverage and begin private coverage , then usually a pre-existing condition would be covered . If you allowed coverage to lapse and then bought private insurance , it is possible for the insurer to excluse the pre-existing condition . Once PPACA takes effect , pre-existing conditions will no longer be allowed for the most part .
I will start with conceding that eliminating the issue of people being unable to get health insurance due to pre-existing conditions and making coverage of maternity mandatory are essentially good things that corrected issues which were increasingly problematic for our society . The stated goals of Obamacare were to eliminate people being uninsured and to reduce the cost of health care and thus lower the cost of health insurance while simultaneously increasing the quality of care . By May of 2014 we can now begin to look back and factually state that ObamaCare has failed to accomplish any of these goals in any meaningful way . Four years of efforts and billions of dollars have resulted in less than a 4 % decrease in the number of uninsured Americans , still leaving 30 + million uninsured . Healthcare costs have continued to rise and utilization rates have increased by 7.1 % in the first quarter of 2014 so we now have both higher unit costs and increased per capita consumption of health care services . This will translate into higher premium costs in 2015 . Changes in health plan benefit designs and provider networks necessitated by the need to comply with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have some chronically ill citizens facing higher out of pocket expenses for their health care and losing access to their established physician and hospital relationships and disruption in their courses of treatment and access to certain prescriptions . As a transitional product , the government created a program called the Pre-Existing Conditions Insurance Plan -LRB- PCIP -RRB- . This plan provided comprehensive , subsidized major medical coverage to persons who were uninsurable due to pre-existing conditions . There was no underwriting , you just had to prove you were uninsurable and you were in . The benefits were consistent with if not superior to what many Americans had through their private individual health insurance or what they received through their jobs . If the objective was to provide quality , affordable health insurance for the uninsurable then properly funding and continuing this program would have been much more cost effective and less disruptive to society in general than the results we have seen to date from ObamaCare . Books have been written and will be written on the failures and shortcomings of the Affordable Care Act and they are too numerous to go into here . Of course , there are those who now have `` affordable '' health insurance because they are receiving subsidies . In practical economic terms though , how effective is any system that requires massive subsidization in order to function ? such an approach introduces inefficiencies from the bureaucracy required to administer it and is largely a transfer of wealth mechanism . Indeed , it creates a whole new set of problems for those too `` rich '' to qualify for subsidies but who now struggle or find themselves unable to afford the much higher premium costs of Obamacare compliant health plans . We take from the middle and upper middle class to subsidize the lower middle class and poor . All in a new system that the very politicians who created it have made sure that they and their families do not have to participate in . These are just some of the things that are wrong with Obamacare .
Yes . Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- individual and group major medical policies that are ObamaCare compliant can not have pre-existing condition exclusions , limitations on benefits , or waiting periods for the pre-existing condition to be covered . If someone is offering you a policy that does not comply with these requirements it may be a Short Term Medical policy or an indemnity/discount type plan . While these are legitimate insurance policies -LRB- as long as you are informed in advance of what they do and do not do -RRB- , as a rule they exclude pre-existing conditions and they do not meet the legal requirements under ObamaCare for avoiding the individual mandate tax penalty .
Can you buy health insurance with a pre-existing condition ? In 2014 yes as it wo n't matter anymore . For now , you will have to refer to your state laws pertaining to pre - existing . In my state there are so many varialbles that automatically eliminate pre existing condition clauses that it is hard to give specific advice as it will depend on your state rules .
Yes . Pre-existing health conditions such as Lupus can no longer be subject to a pre-existing condition exclusion , waiting period or be the cause for declining to cover a person . Now comes the part where I may part company with some of my peers . Unless you know a lot about health insurance and all the ins and outs of what the Affordable Care Act has caused insurance companies to do in redesigning their products , provider networks and prescription formularies , do n't go to Healthcare.gov for anything more than a cursory examination of what your options might be in the government marketplace and whether you will qualify for any subsidies . You can get a reasonable estimate of these factors without having to set up an account on Healthcare.gov through web sites such as HealthSherpa.com . Persons with chronic diseases , such as Lupus , especially need the services of an experienced health insurance broker who knows the intricacies of the health insurance products sold both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplace . It is not enough to just see that a particular health insurance carrier is available in the government marketplace and your decision should not be guided solely by the monthly premium . The person with a chronic health condition generally has existing relationships with primary and specialty care providers and may have already gone through a lengthy process of finding the correct medication -LRB- s -RRB- and services for the treatment of their condition . They may even want or require access to medical facilities and providers outside of their immediate area . YOU CAN NOT TAKE FOR GRANTED THAT ALL INSURANCE CARRIERS AND THEIR PRODUCTS , ESPECIALLY THOSE SOLD WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE , WILL HAVE YOUR PHYSICIANS OR FACILITIES AS IN-NETWORK PROVIDERS OR THAT YOUR MEDICATIONS WILL BE COVERED UNDER THEIR FORMULARY . Also , access to major centers of excellence like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic , Memorial Sloan-Kettering and others certainly can not be assumed . This is a major issue especially among health plans sold in the government marketplaces where positioning your product based upon price point is key to marketing success . One of the ways that some carriers have achieved this price point positioning is through the use of so called `` skinny '' networks . Which , as their name implies , offer a reduced selection of providers and often a much more stringent and restrictive list of approved medications . Before you enroll in any health insurance plan you need to confirm with both the insurance carrier and the heath care provider -LRB- s -RRB- that all or at least as many as possible of the pieces of your care system are going to be available to you . You also need to confirm in what manner they will be available to you . Can you continue to go directly to the specialists you have been using or must you have a referral from your primary care physician before you can access that specialist now ? Will your current medication arrangement be honored or will you have to reinvent the wheel by going through a step therapy process of using other medications and having unsatisfactory results before your current medication is approved by the new carrier ? What if you have been going to a center of excellence facility out of town once a year for follow-up exams and treatment , will the new carrier allow this ? These are just some of the crucial questions any person suffering from a chronic disease needs to ask and get answered before they choose a health plan in the era of the Affordable Care Act .
When you first enroll in Medicare Part B at age 65 or older you will be in your initial Medicare Open Enrollment Period to purchase a Medicare Supplement . You have six month from when your Part B takes effect to enroll in a Medicare Supplement without having to answer any health questions . Your acceptance is guaranteed and pre-existing health conditions are covered immediately with no waiting period . You can purchase a Medicare Supplement anytime you want to outside of your initial Open Enrollment Period but once your Open Enrollment Period ends you will have to answer all health questions to qualify for a Medicare Supplement . If you have a serious health condition you could be denied coverage or have to pay a much higher premium to get the pre-existing health condition covered .
At this moment in time a person can only have their health insurance coverage limited with regards to individual policies . Healthcare reform will require health insurance companies to disregard pre-existing conditions in the individual marketplace . When a individual is obtaining health insurance through their employer the group health plan will generally allow for pre-existing conditions . The gray area resides with businesses that are still offering `` grandfathered '' health plans -LRB- simply request details from your HR rep. -RRB- . There are several other factors that may impact your current health insurance options feel free to email me for further explination .
Getting disability insurance with a pre-existing condition is possible . It depends on the seriousness of the health condition , or rather , how likely that pre-existing condition is to cause disability in later life . Some policies are offered for substandard risk , that have a graded benefit the first years of the policy .
You generally need at least 2 qualified people to get group insurance . Qualified meaning employees . If you 're asking because of pre-existing conditions , remember that pre-existing conditions wo n't matter anymore starting January 1 , 2014 due to healthcare reform . The other advantage of group insurance is that you pay the premium with pre-tax dollars , but again , you must submit documentation proving employee status .
Can you get disability insurance with a pre-existing condition ? Yes , it possible but it will depend on what the pre-existing condition is . Also disability policies carry an exclusion clause that in most cases would create a situation where the policy would n't pay for the condition creating a disability . Good disability insurance is very hard to get , even when totally healthy . Unfortunately , most people only begin to think about having coverage `` after '' they 've gone through a disability , which in turn makes it extremely difficult to purchase coverage .
You can buy health insurance with a pre-existing condition . And not only will the pre-existing condition be covered , but you will not be charged an extra premium . The Affordable Care Act mandates that insurers must provide coverage without increasing the rate for diabetes , heart disease , cancer or any other major or minor condition . There will be no waiting period and a federal subsidy can potentially pay some , most or all of your premium . So where do you get coverage ? Reputable experienced brokers and our websites are the best resource for information , comparing the lowest rates and quickly enrolling . We specialize in helping consumers find the best prices , determining federal subsidy eligibility and purchasing the best available policy . Each state will have different options and prices can vary . Open Enrollment is the best time to obtain coverage although plans can be purchased outside of Open Enrollment .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Can I Switch Medigap Companies ?
In some states , you are allowed to change Medigap plans at any time , without being asked any medical questions . However , in most states , if you are applying outside of your initial enrollment period -LRB- six months after you first get Medicare part B -RRB- , then you will have to qualify medically in order to switch Medigap policies . This means answering health questions on the insurance company application , and usually also involves a phone interview with you and verify your prescription drugs . In most cases , if you answer yes to any of the health questions being asked , you would not be approved by that particular company . That said , not all companies ask the same health questions , so being turned down by one company does not mean you would be turned down everyone .
Most people can switch Medigap companies . If your premium is getting too high , it 's a great idea to have it reviewed and see if you can qualify for a rate reduction with another insurance company . If you are out of your initial Open Enrollment period or not eligible for a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan . If you can qualify medically , you can switch Medigap companies any time of the year . Qualifying means you have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . The insurance company will usually do a phone interview with you and verify your prescription drugs . They will not have anyone come to your house and perform a medical exam . All insurance companies are unique with their health questions -- as is each individual 's health . One company may deny coverage based on diabetes while taking blood pressure medications while another company will approve coverage . You just never know ; that 's why it 's in your best interest to work with an agent who has access to many insurance companies . If I can assist you with your personal Medigap needs , please feel free to contact me .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
You can switch Medigap policies at any time , but it is important to understand potential obstacles . If you are outside of your Medigap open enrollment period -LRB- the 6-month period that begins on the first day of the month in which you 're 65 or older and enrolled in Part B -RRB- , then you will likely have to go through health underwriting to switch to a new plan or insurance company . Some companies do allow you to change your Medigap Plan if you remain with them , e.g. going from a Plan F to a Plan G , without new health underwriting ; but if you change insurance companies you will have to answer all health questions on the application . A new insurance company may deny you coverage based upon evaluation of your current health , so you may not be able to switch your Medigap policy to a new company . It is important to work with a licensed and experienced agent who can place you with a reputable company for the long term when you are in your Medigap open enrollment period .
If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan you can switch to a Medigap Plan during AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period -RRB- . Unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Plan . There are other times during the year that you can switch from a Medicare Advantage Plan to Medigap . If you have Guaranteed Issue Rights , you can purchase a Medigap Plan in your state during your Guaranteed Issue period . Some Guaranteed Issue situations include : 1 . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area . 2 . You move out of your Plan 's service area . 3 . You joined a MA / MAPD when your were first eligible for Medicare Part A at 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide to switch back to Original Medicare . 4 . You dropped a Medigap Policy to join a MA / MAPD for the first time . You 've been in the Plan less than a year and you want to switch back . 5 . You leave a MA / MAPD because the company has n't ' followed the rules -- or misled you . MA = -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- MAPD = -LRB- Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug -RRB- Thank you for reading my response .
You are allowed to switch from a Medicare Advantage plan under certain conditions . If you are 65 or older and have been on Medicare Part B for less than 6 months you can switch to original Medicare and a Medigap . If you are in your Advantage trial right period , you can switch to Medigap . If you can pass underwriting requirements , you can switch to Medigap .
Most people can switch Medigap companies . If your premium is getting too high , it 's a great idea to have it reviewed and see if you can qualify for a rate reduction with another insurance company . If you are out of your initial Open Enrollment period or not eligible for a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan . If you can qualify medically , you can switch Medigap companies any time of the year . Qualifying means you have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . The insurance company will usually do a phone interview with you and verify your prescription drugs . They will not have anyone come to your house and perform a medical exam . All insurance companies are unique with their health questions -- as is each individual 's health . One company may deny coverage based on diabetes while taking blood pressure medications while another company will approve coverage . You just never know ; that 's why it 's in your best interest to work with an agent who has access to many insurance companies . If I can assist you with your personal Medigap needs , please feel free to contact me .
Yes , you can change from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . You must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to original Medicare . If you joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you first signed up for Medicare and are changing to Medigap within 12 months , you can choose from any Medigap policy . If you had a Medigap policy , switched to Medicare Advantage , and decided within 12 months to go back to Medigap , you can get your old policy back if it is still available . However , it will no longer have the prescription drug coverage . You may be able to get that from Medicare Part D.
This is a common question most people have and the answer is yes , you can switch your insurance at any time . There is no mandate which states that you can not switch your insurance but the question is should you switch your insurance ? There are several things you want to consider before switching your auto insurance . The most common reason people switch their insurance is because of price . You will find that most states file insurance rates in January and June . So keep in mind depending on when you decide to switch your policy you could be hitting a price increase or decrease depending on what the state has filed . Switching your insurance once or even several times could actually hurt you . Companies are beginning to offer discounts such as loyalty discounts which dont kick in until you have been with them for so many years . Even though you may be saving $ 50 - $ 100 switching to another carrier you could be losing a lot more than that by not staying with your current insurance company . You may find loyalty discounts to range from 5 % -20 % depending on the company which could save you hundreds of dollars . But every situation is different so be sure to consider when your switching your insurance and what discounts you may or may not be losing .
You can switch your Medigap Plan at any point throughout the year . You do not have to wait for AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period from Oct. 15 - Dec 7 -RRB- . AEP only applies to Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug Plans . If you are not in your Open Enrollment Period or another Guaranteed Issue situation , you 'll have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan . This means you have to answer health questions on the insurance application and then get approved through the medical underwriting department . To see if you are still in Open Enrollment or any other Guaranteed Issue situation , it is best to contact Medicare or an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . If you have to qualify medically for a new Medigap Plan , an independent agent can review your health history and let you know which insurance companies you may qualify with . There are many reasons why you may want to switch Medigap plans -LRB- lower premium , more benefits , less benefits -RRB- . Please feel free to read this article which gives a little more detail about changing your Medigap insurance . WEBSITELINK Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can help you with your specific situation .
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The great news is people can switch a Medigap Plan anytime it benefits them and they do n't need to wait for a certain enrollment period . The Medigap open enrollment period is a 6 month period when a person is 65 years old and gets Medicare Part B . It allows the individual a one time period where they can apply for a Medigap Plan without answering any health questions . However , even after the open enrollment period people over 65 switch plans all the time to save money or improve their benefits . There is usually a dozen or so health questions that are focused on big health issues in the last 2 years . A good independent agent that specializes in Medigap Plans will be able to go over those questions with you and help you pick the carrier that meets your needs the best .
There is no fee that I am aware of to switch from one insurance company to another . The only reason that I am aware of that you want to switch insurance companies is lower cost . If there is a fee involved then you probably will not switch insurance companies . There is no fee to my knowledge to switch
You can switch your auto policy at any time . The most popular motivation to switch insurance carriers is price . People are looking for the best price for there insurance all the time . Other reasons to switch would be a new car purchase or moving to a new state . Switching carriers is easy and there are many to choose from . Shopping your auto insurance around is a great idea to compare prices . Using and agent can help you find insurance carriers that you normally would not have access to but going direct to and insurer online is also beneficial cutting out a middle man and getting quotes instantly . Be sure to check the term dates , is it six months or a year policy ? This can effect the way you compare the premiums . You will want to match your old coverage with your new quotes . Make sure the coverages are the same or similar this can prevent a coverage gap where you thought you had coverage . If you new vehicle is n't so new any more you may want to lower the amount of coverage on a particular vehicle . This can help lower your premium on the new policy or you can amend you current one . So while you can switch you insurer at any time do your research and make sure that it works in your favor .
Typically , when you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and you have a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan , you will not need to have an additional health plan . Original Medicare -LRB- parts A & B -RRB- cover approximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses - Medigap plans will pay all or a portion of the other 20 % . If you have group coverage as well , you would be spending extra money on those premiums unnecessarily . You can not be forced to go on her group health insurance if the two of you got married - it 's only an available option for you . If you have a Medicare supplement plan other than a plan F or plan G , I would recommend switching to one of those two plans before adding yourself to your fiance 's group coverage - it would save you countless dollars by comparison . Plan F provides full coverage - every other plan provides good coverage , but you will share some of the expenses . I would recommend consulting with an experienced independent Medigap broker who can review your specific situation and help you determine the best course of action . I would also suggest reviewing the Medigap plan you currently have to see if there are better rates available -LRB- the plans are standardized meaning you regardless of which carrier it 's through , the benefits are exactly the same - plan F from company A is the same as plan F from company B -RRB- . Changing a Medigap plan can be completed at anytime during the year - you do not have to wait for the annual enrollment period like you would with prescription drug plans or Medicare advantage plans . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage -LRB- my background is in senior insurance -RRB- and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , you can switch from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . To do so , you must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage plan . Then you must enroll in original Medicare . If anyone asks you to buy a Medigap policy without being enrolled in original Medicare , you should report them . If you have never used Medigap before and you had Medicare Advantage for under a year , you can have your choice of Medigap policies .
In most circumstances it probably doesnt make any difference when you switch auto policies . Cancellations are treated on a pro-rata basis by many insurance companies . Doing a switch at renewal might be easiest , though . When considering a switch there are two things to consider . The first is the effect dropping coverage with one company might have on the premiums of other insurance policies that might have been bundled . The second is that switching frequently to save a few dollars does not allow you to develop any relationship with the agent , who might be your best friend at the time of a claim .
Assuming you are not under 65 and disabled , you can apply any time you are at least 65 years old and enrolled in both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- original Medicare -RRB- . If you are on a Medicare Advantage Plan , you may not purchase a Medicare Supplement unless you switch back to original Medicare . The best time to `` sign up '' for a Medicare Supplement or `` Medigap '' policy is during your Medigap Open Enrollment Period , which lasts for 6 months and begins on the first day of the month your both 65 or older and enrolled in Medicare Part B . During your Medigap Open Enrollment Period , an insurance company can not use medical underwriting and can not rufue to sell you any Medigap policy it offers .
Every Medicare Beneficiary gets a 6 month period when you are allowed to buy any Medigap Plan that 's sold in your state . This Open Enrollment Period starts in the first month your ' e covered under Medicare Part B , AND you 're 65 or older . This Open Enrollment Period is only available one time . It 's a great opportunity to get a Medigap Plan during this time because you ca n't be denied a Policy due to current or past health conditions . If you 've been on Medicare Part B for more than 6 months , then you are out of the initial Open Enrollment Period . However , you CAN still apply for a Medigap Plan -- you 'll just have to answer the health questions on the application . If you already have Medigap coverage and want to switch Medigap Plans , you can apply for a new Plan any time of the year . Since there are many moving parts to Medicare , you may benefit from speaking with an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . I am happy to help you with your specific situation .
You may have already gotten this resolved but since I have not seen anyone respond to this I thought I would put in my 2 cents worth . Everything you mention makes sense to me . When the company switched the accounts to the guaranteed fund the only way to switch it back would be to notify the company , usually with a company allocation form identifying the new allocations . What troubles me is that from what you are saying , there is no notification of the process . My best guess is there is something in the small print you have which talks about the process but without seeing any of this I can not directly help -LRB- there are no attachments on this venue -RRB- . I would recommend finding a broker and see if they know what the process is specifically with the company the policy is with .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is Mortgage Life And Disability Insurance ?
Mortgage Life and Disability Insurance pays the lender monthly mortgage payments during a time of disability on the part of the person who is paying off the mortgage . The payments end when the insured person is no longer disabled . It pays the remainder of the mortgage to the lender if the person purchasing the home should die .
Generally Bank owned life insurance is designed to protect the bank if you take out a loan . I usually recommend buying your own policy . It gives your beneficiary more options . For example , mortgage insurance is usually offered by a bank . It can also be purchased on your own . Both would pay off the mortgage if you die . With the bank owned policy , that is the only choice . What if your spouse does n't want or need to pay off the mortgage however . This is not always the best option . If you own the policy , your wife or beneficiary may choose to invest the life insurance funds and use the interest to help make mortgage payments . Or the money would be more advantageous elsewhere . Mortgage life insurance with the bank is tied to that mortgage . What if you move ? Owning your own policy is portable , you can take it with you to your new home . I usually recommend level term to cover a mortgage . That way you have extra protection as your mortgage decreases because the death benefit will stay level . With a banks mortgage life insurance it just pays off the mortgage to the bank on that loan . Yes it works , but you are better off with your own policy .
Mortgage Life to protect your love ones from the burden of a mortgage can be accomplished in a couple of ways . You can purchase a policy from your bank or mortgage company that will pay off your obligation to them in the event of your death . The amount of the policy will be paid to the bank and your family and loved ones will not have that mortgage as a burden . The other option is to purchase a Term Life Policy through an independent agent that compares the best companies for this type of protection . The main benefits of a Term Life Policy is that the death benefit will not decrease during the life or term of the policy . The other benefit is that the death benefit is paid to your beneficiary and they decide where the money is distributed . Your family and/or loved on can pay off the house and use additional funds for final expenses or other considerations . You should compare both options . The term life policy is more flexible but both should be considered . Mortgage disability insurance can be purchased as separate policy through your bank or some insurance companies . Disability income is paid at a maximum per month depending on your state . They will compare what you receive from other sources , such as your employer or personal policy , and determine the maximum amount of payment that your can receive . You can add disability income additions or riders to your term life policy for the amount of your monthly mortgage payment and get the convenience of one payment . The cost of these policies and riders are dependent on the amount of monthly payment needed , the length of time the payments continue , your occupation , and the amount of time between when the disability starts and when the payments start . Check with your agent to determine how the program works for you .
Life insurance is usually not required as a stipulation of getting a mortgage unless the down payment is very low . Then the borrower is required to buy a type of insurance called `` PMI '' , or Private Mortgage Insurance . This coverage would pay the lender what is owed to them in the case of the borrower 's death . However , many people do use regular life insurance to cover their mortgages . Term life insurance can be purchased in the same number of years as the mortgage ; is a reasonable cost for that what can be a large amount of coverage ; the benefit does not decrease as the mortgage goes down ; and it goes to the beneficiary of your choice . Especially with today 's low mortgage rates , it may not be in the best interest of the beneficiary to pay off the mortgage . Having a life insurance benefit to invest or pay other bills could allow the survivor to keep paying the mortgage and keep the home . Or they could pay it off and keep the remainder of the life insurance proceeds .
The Mortgage itself is a Loan Account setting up a method of repayment ; the repayment structure includes interest over the term of the loan . Monthly payments on a mortgage loan account are sometimes referred to as : P&I -LRB- Principal and Interest -RRB- . At the request of the customer and in some cases , as a requirement to the mortgage contract , an Impound Account -LRB- Escrow Account -RRB- will be initiated in order to accommodate the bi-annual payment of property taxes as well as an annual payment of home insurance . This account will pay a nominal interest rate credited to the account at the end of each year . If the customer has an Impound Account , the monthly mortgage payments will include a monthly savings amount which will be deposited directly into the impound -LRB- escrow -RRB- account in order to accumulate funds to pay future tax and insurance invoices . Regarding Homeowners Insurance , the policy must be purchased by the homeowner and the mortgage company must be listed as the Mortgage Loss Payee ; copies of all documents will be mailed to the mortgage company including invoices . If a homeowner does not purchase home insurance , the mortgage contract allows the mortgage company to place ` Forced Insurance ' on the property and charge the surcharged premium to the mortgage account ; this is not in the interest of the homeowner and should be avoided in the interest of premium amount and coverage afforded . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
A mortgage disability policy will make the mortgage payments in the event you are dsabled for a specified period of time . You can purchase this through your bank or some companies offer mortgage disability plans . If you have a mortgage take a look at picking up a mortgage dsability plan . Contact a local independent agent familiar with disability insurance .
You do not need to have life insurance with a mortgage . If you borrow more than a certain amount , you will need to purchase PMI -LRB- private mortgage insurance -RRB- that will repay the lender what is owed them , if you pass away . Life insurance , on the other hand , will pay off your entire mortgage and leave the excess to your beneficiary to pay other bills . If your mortgage interest rate is so low that your beneficiary wants to keep paying the mortgage and invest the life insurance proceeds , they can so that , with regular life insurance . So , while life insurance is not required with a mortgage , it is an excellent idea .
Disability mortgage insurance is traditionally a payment provision to a mortgage loan that pays the monthly payment when due if the borrower who opts to have the coverage is sick or hurt and unable to work under the provisions of the coverage . Alternatively , some people can purchase specific products that cover mortgage payments , or at least make the amount of the mortgage payment available as a disability income benefit , if the insured become sick or hurt and is unable to hurt . This coverage is bought to ensure that mortgage payments are paid when the borrower can not work to earn money to pay the mortgage .
While a good idea , it is not required by law to purchase a life insurance policy in order to get a mortgage . I assume what you are referring to is Mortgage Protection Insurance -LRB- MPI -RRB- , which would pay your beneficiary so that they could pay off your mortgage in the event of your death . This is not to be confused with Private Mortgage Insurance -LRB- PMI -RRB- which is required to protect the lender in case of foreclosure , and is a legitimate requirement for borrowers who can not put down over 19 % on a home . The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau announced a crackdown this month -LRB- April , 2013 -RRB- on mortgage insurers who give kickbacks to mortgage lenders in return for business . So do n't let your lender make you purchase mortgage insurance from a certain company in order to get a mortgage . If you do wish to protect your mortgage in the case of your death , buying a simple level Term policy is often the most cost effective solution .
Mortgage Disability Insurance is disability insurance that will pay what you ow to your mortgage lender if you are unable to work due to illness or injury . Long Term Disability Insurance pays you a monthly benefit that can be used to pay bills -LRB- including mortgage -RRB- if you are disabled .
Mortgage disability insurance policy features may be different for policies from different companies . But the general gist of mortgage disability insurance is that it makes your mortgage payments for your during a period of being disabled . The payments are in addition to any other disability insurance policies you might have , and go to the lender . There is also an elimination period as with regular Disability insurance .
Mortgage Life and Disability Insurance pays the lender monthly mortgage payments during a time of disability on the part of the person who is paying off the mortgage . The payments end when the insured person is no longer disabled . It pays the remainder of the mortgage to the lender if the person purchasing the home should die .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The need for life insurance for most people increases with debt . The fact that your question states that you have a new mortgage suggests you now have a new debt . If you or your spouse or partner were to die and that income is lost , would it be a burden to the other loved one to cover this new debt ? If the answer is yes , you need additional life insurance . If you just closed on the new house you will soon receive or be bombarded is probably a better way to describe it , with letters about mortgage life insurance . These letters will look as if they are being sent by your mortgage company , but chances are they are not . Life insurance companies pay mortgage lenders for their lists and their logos to create leads to sell decreasing mortgage insurance . As you pay off your mortgage through the years , the face amount or benefit to your loved ones decreases , because you owe less to the bank . If you purchase a guaranteed level term life insurance policy , then your loved ones get the difference not the insurance company . If you have a 30 year mortgage for $ 200,000 , purchase a $ 200,000 30 year level term policy to cover that debt for your loved ones . When you pay off the mortgge drop the insurance coverage . Never leave a loved one holding excess debt when you die .
When you purchase traditional life insurance to cover your mortgage , you are buying a policy that will pay the same death benefit for the entire length of the policy , regardless of what your mortgage is at that time . Most people leave the death benefit to a personal beneficiary who they can trust to pay off the mortgage , or to a trust that stipulates to use the death benefit in that fashion . However , one of the nice things about using life insurance for mortgage protection , is that a beneficiary may decide to keep the mortgage and use the death benefit in another way , if that is more favorable to them . This may especially be true at this time of very low mortgage interest rates . Some people take the step of reducing their policy coverage as their mortgage gets past a certain point of being paid off .
Anytime something major changes in your life it 's a good idea to evaluate the amount of insurance coverage you need . With a mortgage I would recommend a term policy that covers the length of your mortgage . If your mortgage is 20 years purchase a 20 year gauranteed level term , or for a 30 year mortgage purchase a 30 year term . This is the most economical way to protect you and your family if a tragedy occurs . If soemthing happens your spouse has the funds to pay off the mortgage . If not your cost remains level while the mortgage is in force and goes away when the mortgage is paid off . To save money you may want to ask your insurance agent about layering the term policies to cover your mortgage .
The term ` Escrow ' has a double meaning . Escrow is utilized mainly in the Western States as the legal process of closing the purchase or refinancing transaction of real property ; Escrow Companies exist to facilitate the purchase , sale & refinancing of real property transactions . In States where Escrow Companies are not used , Mortgage and Title Companies utilize ` Closing Professionals ' to facilitate the same process . During the Escrow/Closing process , if a mortgage is involved , it is customary for the mortgage lender to require that all taxes are current and property insurance is paid in full for the first year . Escrow companies will be charged with the fiduciary responsibility to assure the mortgage company upon funding that both conditions have been met and proven . The term Escrow is also used synonymously with a Mortgage Impound Account which is simply a savings account setup for the purpose of saving funds in preparation of making payments to renew property insurance and property taxes ; a mortgage company or bank will simply calculate the necessary amount to be deposited into the Escrow/Impound account monthly in order for a shortage not to exist when future property tax and future property insurance invoices are presented . The monthly calculation usually involves the addition of the annual property tax and the annual property insurance , a 10 % safety buffer is added , then the total is divided by 12 . The account is an interest bearing account and an annual assessment summary is sent to the mortgage holder at the end of each year . There is usually no charge associated with having this account ; it is simply to facilitate payments without the burden of a large obligation at one time for the mortgage holder . It is important for homeowners to understand the escrow and/or impound process as there seems to be many misconceptions of how the process works . It is a very simple process but the most confusing to the ley person is the fact that he/she is actually depositing a monthly savings amount into an account which will pay future invoices presented . Property Taxes are generally invoiced twice a year and Homeowners Insurance is generally invoiced once a year ; money is saved on a monthly basis in order for the funds to be present when the invoices arrive . For a further and/or more detailed explanation , you may wish to contact your Real Estate , Mortgage and or Escrow/Closing Professional directly .
Yes , you can . Most people assume they can only switch at renewal , but this is n't so . If you choose to switch , it 's not hard . When you find new coverage , go ahead and pay for it . Then you can cancel your current policy . They will refund the premium they have n't used . For instance , if you paid for the entire year and you cancel six months into the term , they 'll refund half the premium . Now some things to be aware of : Do n't cancel your current coverage until you have new coverage in place . If you have a mortgage , be sure to notify your mortgage company about the new coverage . They may send you a notice that they have no coverage and you need to address this or they will force coverage at an extremely high rate that only protects them , not you . Get this notice to your agent so they can get the mortgage company what they need . If you pay your insurance through your mortgage payment , it 's a little more complicated . When you closed on your mortgage , you paid the first year of insurance up front . Then , the mortgage company puts part of your payment into escrow for the insurance . When it renews , they 've collected enough to pay the full year again , and the process continues that way . If you cancel during the year , the refund will come directly to you , not the mortgage company , and your escrow may be short . So , you 'll have to pay the premium for the first year to give the mortgage company time to catch up . It 's your insurance and you can cancel any time you 'd like . Just be aware of some of the pitfalls that may exist . Find a good agent you can trust and they can take care of the whole process for you .
Mortgage life insurance works very similar to a traditional life insurance policy - in short , a premium is paid to an insurance company and a death benefit is paid by the company to the beneficiary in the event the insured dies during the life of the policy . There is one key difference between traditional life insurance policies and mortgage life insurance - the structure of the policy death benefit.Traditional policies feature a level death benefit for the life of the policy along with level premiums for a specified term -LRB- or guaranteed forever -RRB- . Mortgage life insurance features level premiums , but have a decreasing death benefit - much like how a mortgage works -LRB- hence the name -RRB- . In today 's marketplace , the rates/premiums for a traditional policy are very competitive with mortgage insurance rates .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Is Lunesta Covered By Medicare ?
Lunesta is a type of prescription medication , generally used to treat insomnia . Since it 's a medication , you would need to look at your Medicare prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part C , Medicare Advantage with drug coverage , or your Part D standalone prescription drug plan -RRB- formulary to see if it 's covered . A formulary is the list of medications covered by your plan .
Lunesta is a type of prescription medication , generally used to treat insomnia . Since it 's a medication , you would need to look at your Medicare prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part C , Medicare Advantage with drug coverage , or your Part D standalone prescription drug plan -RRB- formulary to see if it 's covered . A formulary is the list of medications covered by your plan .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
The question is difficult to answer because of the amount of variables involved but I will try to cover all the bases . If you want a Medicare supplement that is going to cover all Medical expenses approved but not covered in full by Medicare , you would go with a plan G or Plan F. Plan G has a deductible of $ 166 but after it has been met , it is the same as a plan F which covers the $ 166 Part B deductible . So for full coverage , go with Plan F or G but they will cost you the most a well . If you have a high amount of medical care , the math will work on these plans . If you do not utilize a lot of care , you will be spending the money on premium every month but getting your moneys worth out of it . For those that have low/basic medical needs , you could try a lower cost option . Plans K , L and High F supplements can all be good options to consider . Like all Medicare supplements , you can still go to any doctor that accepts Medicare when using these plans . Depending on the state you live in and company you choose the price points will vary between the three plans . In a nutshell here is what they cover . Plan L - covers 75 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare Plan K - covers 50 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare High F - covers 100 % of costs not covered by Medicare after a deductible of $ 2,180 has been met . The deductible is not a true deductible but means that you only pay the deductibles and copays not covered by original Medicare . Original Medicare still provides the benefits you would normally get but the High F plan does not cover the left over costs until the $ 2,180 has been met . High F usually has the lowest price point of the three plans . In some states , the premium can be as low as $ 28 a month for the plan . Given it is a supplement , you would still need to buy a drug plan if you wanted RX coverage .
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
I do n't believe Medicare will cover an at-home blood pressure monitor . It does not appear to be listed on Medicare 's website as durable medical equipment . Upon a little research , it looks like there are a couple of exceptions to have it covered by Medicare : 1 -RRB- a patient receiving blood dialysis in the home . 2 -RRB- an ambulatory bp monitoring device that takes/stores bp readings in 24 hour cycles for a patient who a doctor believes has `` white coat hypertension '' -LRB- artificially high bp readings when taken in a doctor 's office - based on multiple testing completed in an office and out of an office -RRB- . If you meet either of these and Medicare approves coverage for the device , it would be covered under Medicare Part B and the monitor would then need to be rented from a Medicare-certified medical equipment supplier . Medicare would then cover 80 % of the expense and you would be responsible for 20 % of the expense -LRB- if you have a Medigap plan , it would then likely cover all or a portion of that other 20 % -RRB- . If you 're under a Medicare Advantage plan , it may provide benefits not covered under original Medicare so it would be good to check with your carrier . If Medicare does not cover the device , you will be responsible for the cost of the monitor . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
Medicare is a federal-government run program so the type of coverage available under Medicare Parts A & B -LRB- also known as Original Medicare -RRB- will be the same regardless of the state you live in . The calculation of premiums for Original Medicare is the same everywhere as well - your income level can increase your Part B monthly premium though as it 's based on income level brackets . Medicare Part A is your hospital insurance . It provides benefits for your inpatient hospital stay , skilled nursing facility care , nursing home care , hospice care , and certain home health services . The benefit that is the most common claim is for hospital stays . During a hospital stay , your Part A will cover certain hospital services and supplies including semi-private rooms , meals , general nursing , and medications given during your stay . Acceptable hospital stays can include critical access hospitals , inpatient rehab facilities , LTC hospitals , acute care hospitals , and mental health care - you may want to confirm with Medicare whether a certain inpatient stay would be covered by a facility that is not a traditional hospital . Medicare Part B is your physician insurance . It covers doctor visits , tests , surgeries , preventive services , and supplies including DMEs -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- . The Part B deductible is $ 147 in 2014 . You 're responsible for about 20 % of healthcare expenses covered by Part B - Medicare only covers approximately 80 % of the costs . There is a guidebook called `` Medicare & You '' that provides a lot of information regarding Medicare coverage - the guidebook is updated each year with any new changes to coverage - you can get a copy of this from the medicare.gov website as well as look up additional information . I always recommend those on Medicare buy a Medigap plan to supplement their Part A & Part B coverage . Your Part A & Part B only covers about 80 % of expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % of the expenses . The big advantage of having a Medigap plan is that it creates a very predictable healthcare expense structure . Medigap plans are also standardized , meaning the plan benefits are the same regardless of which company you purchase it from . The premiums for these programs can vary from company to company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
Medicare can cover INR testing once a month when certain conditions are met . Typically you 'll need to consult with your doctor and have them determine if it is medically necessary and confirm with Medicare that the treatment course will be covered -LRB- would fall under Part B - your physician insurance for outpatient procedures -RRB- . Here 's a link to a publication from CMS -LRB- the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services -RRB- that provides a detailed explanation regarding INR testing , what specific conditions must be met to have it covered , and how Medicare covers it : WEBSITELINK Please note , under Medicare Part B , only 80 % of the expense would be covered by Medicare . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan , it may cover some or all of the other 20 % -LRB- depending on the plan letter you have -RRB- of the service expenses . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement , please feel free to contact me to see about qualifying for one . Medicare Supplement plans are standardized , meaning the benefits are exactly the same regardless of which insurance carrier you have the coverage through -LRB- only the price is different ! -RRB- Even if you already have a Medicare Supplement plan , I can take a quick look to see if a lower monthly premium is available -LRB- takes less than 5 minutes and I may be able to save you a ton of money on your monthly premium -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is very comprehensive health coverage for those that qualify . Medicare will cover a Total Knee Replacement as long as the Physician , Hospital , and any other healthcare providers are deemed as providers . You can check each provider out on the Medicare.gov website . Medicare Part A would cover the hospital expenses and if a Skilled Nursing Facility is needed for rehabilitation . You will have a deductible if you only have Medicare A and B . A Medicare Supplement can cover all or part of the out of pocket costs . Medicare Part B would cover the Physician charges and any outpatient services required . You have an annual deductible and 20 % coinsurance . A Medicare Supplement can cover all or part of these our to pocket cost . Medicare Advantage plans have daily charges and copays that vary for every plan . You should check with the plan to confirm that the providers are in their network and determine what your costs might be .
There are 10 standardized Medigap Plans available to Medicare Beneficiaries . They include Plan A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N with Plan F also offering a high-deductible plan . The most popular standardized Medigap Plans are F , G , and N. Plan F will cover all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , co-insurance or deductibles for Medicare covered costs . If you choose the high-deductible Plan F , you must pay for Medicare covered costs up to the deductible amount of $ 2,140 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- before your Medigap Plan F will pay anything . Plan G will cover all your Medicare approved charges after you have satisfied the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Once the small deductible is met , Medigap Plan G acts like Plan F and covers the co-pays , co-insurance and deductibles that Original Medicare does not cover . Plan N covers 100 % of the Part B co-insurance , except for a small co-pay for some office visits -LRB- never more than $ 20 per visit -RRB- and up to a co-pay of $ 50 for emergency room visits -LRB- waived if admitted as an inpatient -RRB- . You are also responsible for satisfying the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- and any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . If you have further questions regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Should I Buy Long Term Care Insurance In My 40s ?
Long-term care insurance is kind of like life insurance in the way that you should purchase it as early as possible . If you wait until your health is bad you may not qualify for the insurance . And , none of us know when our health will start going downhill . People might become uninsurable due to sudden and unforeseen events . Do you purchase automobile insurance after an accident ? Do you purchase homeowners insurance after your house burns ? The answer to both of these questions is no . And , the same is true for long-term care insurance . If you have friends or family that are younger than forty they may want to look into it at a younger age . I just read the answer for Gary Lane , and if you live in California I would recommend you contact him regarding the life insurance with living benefits . As an independent agent in Florida , I have access to at least a couple of those companies , as well . Gary , I would certainly like to talk to you about those companies and products if you are willing to share some information with me . One more thought regarding the best time to purchase insurance , if it is not affordable now when will it be affordable ? It does not get cheaper as you get older . It gets more expensive .
I personally never recommend long term care insurance until a person is at least mid 50s to early 60s . I believe long term disability insurance is more important in your 40s if you are still earning income . There are many other insurance products to consider in your financial plan and long term care insurance is near the bottom of the list in your 40s .
Yes . It will certainly cost you less then . However , you might be interested in life insurance with living benefits . It can cover the costs of long term care , along with disability , chronic care , along with the terminal care . It is now offered by only 5 companies in America . Love to talk with you about it . Thank you . GARY LANE 7144229616
If it 's affordable and makes sense as part of your financial plan . As you look at various companies that sell LTCi , make sure you only purchase what you believe is necessary in terms of how long the policy will last once you need care . Another and most important consideration is the cost of living rider . I would purchase this with the highest benefit accumulation . Before you commit yourself you will want to look at the alternatives . For instance there are permanent life policies that have long term riders as well as annuities which provide a much higher payout if you need care .
I would wait until after 50 to buy Long Term Care Insurance unless you have a fear that your health will not be good if you wait . E.g. . If diabetes or heart disease run in your family , getting your Long Term Care Insurance policy in your 40 's could be the only time you will be ever be able to get LTCI .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
As a retirement planning specialist , I spend alot of time doing long term care planning . Why would I do this ? Because NOTHING will derail a person 's life-time savings faster than a custodial -LRB- AKA long term care -RRB- claim . There are two reasons why a person should purchase LTC ; the first is that they care about the quality of care , and having a say in where care will be provided , should they require it . The second reason is that they care about protecting the assets that they have acquired over the course of their life-time , and they want to protect those assets for their healthy spouse and/or children , rather then have those assets eaten up by impairment , or having them signed over to medicaid or a nursing home . As far as WHEN a person should purchase coverage ; my youngest clients are usually in their 40 's , and with them I usually recommend a hybrid life insurance-LTC product ; my average clients are in their mid 50 's to late 60 's , and for them I recommend either traditional long term care or a single premium policy with refund provisions , and my oldest clients are in their mid 70 's . I think the best time to purchase for most people is in their mid to late 50 's , because most will get better underwriting and a favorable premium . I hope this helps .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
What 's the best age to buy Long Term Care Insurance ? There are many opinions as to the answer for that question , offered by professionals in the insurance field and in by professionals in the field of issues related to aging . As someone who has a background in both fields , I think the best age to purchase Long Term Care Insurance is by age 60 . Rates are lower and you are less likely to have a medical condition to disqualify you than if you wait longer than that . Some cite statistics that over 40 % of Long Term Care is provided to persons under age 65 , so you should purchase LTC coverage at a much younger age . But many of the younger persons in extended care facilities have mental illness or other lifelong conditions that would not have qualified them for LTC insurance in the first place . It is certainly true that the younger you are , the lower the rates , but you do have to offset the extra years for which you will be making those payments . More important than that , I believe , is getting the policy while you still qualify . If you see some health conditions sneaking up on you at age 40 that could be trouble at age 60 , get your Long Term Care coverage while you can .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
In my opinion there are three factors that regulate the size of the long-term care insurance market : - Fear . No one wants to consider , discuss , or especially visualize themselves as unable to take care of normal daily activities of elderly life . Its almost as if some people say , `` If I do n't think about it , it wo n't happen to me '' . There is great anxiety over whom among their relatives or close friends might end up being their caregiver . Many people are scared that they wo n't be able to afford the cost of long-term care . They simply do not want to `` go there '' . It is too scary . - Denial . `` If I ever get that way , just take me out in the back yard and shoot me '' is the classic sign of superficial denial . Such a statement is not made with any degree of sincerity , but what it really says is that the person knows it could happen and that they do not want to live that way and be a burden to their spouse of extended family . But , not to worry . There must be a government program out there that will take care old people that have nowhere to go when they ca n't take care of themselves . Certainly , in a country as rich as ours , no one will allow another to die alone or in the gutter . - Lack of experience . The vast majority of people age 45-65 have not had to care for an elderly relative or close friend . They have no idea of the psychological and emotional energy expended in taking care of a person 24/7/365 . They have never gotten an invoice from a skilled nursing service or had to go shopping for a facility and compare prices for monthly care , nor have the ever even been inside a nursing home and seen the conditions that some elderly have to endure because they did n't have a choice . To turn the question around a bit : Who are the people that do buy their own long-term care insurance ? Most of those that do have gone through personal care giving . They know the challenge . They know the commitment . They know the costs . They know the sacrifices that others in the family have to go through . They know that extended , expensive , long-term care can effect two - even three - generations.About 8 % of the American population has purchased their own long-term care insurance . About 17 % or more of that same population is going to need two years or more of skilled long-term care , either at home , or in a facility or both . Medicare is currently footing about 30-40 % of that bill . As the boomer demographic moves through the age of needed care , who is going to pay for it ?
What age is considered young for long term care insurance ? When you turn age 50 , youll more than likely receive an invitation to join AARP . Most advisers start addressing long term care needs at age 50 as part of their retirement strategy for their clients . But age 60 seems to be the age where long term care becomes a serious consideration . But if your family has a predisposition to disease or a geriatric history of nursing home care , you may not want to wait until age 50 . When youre young and healthy , long term care insurance is relatively inexpensive . If your family fits this profile , you should investigate long term care even if youre age 40 .
I personally never recommend long term care insurance until a person is at least mid 50s to early 60s . I believe long term disability insurance is more important in your 40s if you are still earning income . There are many other insurance products to consider in your financial plan and long term care insurance is near the bottom of the list in your 40s .
Critical Illness coverages can provide money to replace lost income and to pay the expenses not coverage by your medical insurance . Studies have shown that medical insurance covers only about 40 % of the true cost of a serious disease such as disease . In addition to medical coinsurance and deductibles , there is loss of income to contend with . The person that is off sick may have disability income insurance to help with this but often the spouse has to also miss work and there is nothing to replace their income . And , if it is their child that is sick , often both will miss work with no income replacement . When you add all the additional expenses of travel , special diets , transportation , child care , etc. the additional expenses can be devastating to a family . One thing I had never thought of before I had a bout with cancer was clothing expenses . I went from 215 lbs to 140 lbs which meant i had to buy new clothes . Now that I am at 185 lbs , my fat clothes do n't fit and my skinny clothes don '' t fit so I have to buy more . Critics of Critical Illness insurance say it is not a good buy because you might have a condition that is not covered under the policy but if you bought a plan that covered every possible event , the cost would be prohibitive . However , you can buy coverage for some of the most common serious conditions at a very reasonable premium . I have never had a cancer patient tell me that their caner or CI policy was a bad buy .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
end question
start question
annuities
How Are Premiums Invested In A Fixed Annuity ?
In a fixed annuity the funds are invested in the general account of the insurance company . These funds are invested so that the company can make the future payments that are promised . Companies often offer alternatives to their fixed account . These range all the way to a variable account where the owner of the annuity can select specific funds .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
Fixed annuities invest your premium into conservative , long term securities -LRB- usually bonds -RRB- chosen by the company . These steady investments allow the company to guarantee you fixed payments later on . Your payments are also guaranteed to last a number of years or a lifetime , determined in advance . Variable annuities are invested in stocks and more risky investments which the annuity holders choose themselves . They may have some guaranteed elements , but also have the potential to pay more than a fixed annuity , or less than a fixed annuity , due to that element of risk .
What are the differences between fixed and variable annuities ? Well , the biggest difference would be the investment pool you work from . A fixed annuity investment choices are made by the insurance company and you receive a stated % return for that year . You do n't have to do anything . A variable annuity shifts the investment risk onto the individual and they , not the insurance company -LRB- to a degree -RRB- decide what the annuity will be invested in . The Risk shifts to the insured and while the possibility exists to outgain the fixed annuity , the possibility of loss , even loss of existing balance exists . A variable annuity REQUIRES attention to a much great degree than a fixed .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
Fixed annuities can definitely be a great idea for seniors . The set payout creates a known , predictable income stream that helps supplement a senior 's other retirement income . They are low-risk and generate a guaranteed interest rate return . There are immediate and deferred fixed annuities and they are set up through insurance companies . If you 're already at the retirement age , you may want to consider an immediate annuity . If you 're in younger years , then a deferred annuity may be more preferable . An immediate fixed annuity makes fixed payments starting when the annuity is established that are determined by your age and the size of your annuity -LRB- how much money you put into it -RRB- . A deferred annuity accumulates over time . If you would like to look into fixed annuities in further detail and see what interest rates are available in today 's market from a number of different carriers , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name . I have an agent in my office that has a strong background in fixed annuities and can help get your program set up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
The different kinds of annuities have not just one , but a variety of features that make them different . Here are some of them . Keep in mind that each annuity will have a combination of these differing features . 1 -RRB- Immediate vs Deferred . Immediate annuities are often single premium annuities and they begin making payments to the beneficiary almost immediately . Deferred annuities are often paid periodically , although they can also be paid in a single premium . Deferred annuities are not annuitized until after an extended accumulation period . 2 -RRB- Single Premium or Multiple Premium . 3 -RRB- Fixed , Indexed , or Variable . Fixed annuities have a guaranteed minimum interest rate that is paid on the premium paid for the annuity . Indexed annuities have a base interest rate but can perform above that through the use of market indexes . Variable annuities are invested in the stock or other markets and may or may not have guarantees .
Indexed annuities are different from other fixed annuities because of the way it credits interest to your annuity 's value . Some fixed annuities only credit interest calculated at a rate set in the contract . Other fixed annuities also credit interest at rates set from time to time by the insurance company . Indexed Annuities credit interest using a formula based on changes in the index to which the fixed indexed annuity is linked . The formula decides how the additional interest , if any , is calculated and credited . How much additional interest you get and when you get it depends on the features of your particular contract ?
Hybrid annuities are fixed indexed annuities , equity indexed annuities , or variable annuities with a rider that offers lifetime income . Some also offer enhanced death benefit , long term care , and/or home health care . Hybrid annuities work by allowing the buyer to invest funds in a fixed account as well as variable account . The fixed account provides the guaranteed funds and the variable components provide for greater return by investing in non-guaranteed securities .
Fixed Annuities are very safe . Variable Annuities however are subject to stock market fluctuations . Fixed Annuities offer Guarantees . For every contractual Guarantee that an Insurance Company makes -LRB- such as 3 % Guaranteed for 5 years -RRB- , must be backed by purchasing a mix of US Treasuries along with a small amount of various other investments . But mostly the Guarantees made by the Insurance Company are largely backed by the financial stability of US Treasuries -LRB- which are considered the safest investment class there is -RRB- . As pointed out already , the best way to judge the financial stability of an insurance company is by their Financial Ratings . In the investment world , And ratings that is a B + + or higher is considered `` investment grade '' . Although as the term of the contract increases , your minimum acceptable Financial Rating should increase as well in my opinion . A longer time frame creates more risk . So for a 3 or 4 year Annuity a B + + Rating might be acceptable for some people . But for an Annuity that is 6 years or longer , it is highly recommended to use an `` A '' Rated Carrier .
That is a great question ! There are two things that could be seen as disadvantages to having a fixed rate annuity . One is inherent in all annuities , and that is the fact that the money is untouchable for several years , without paying penalties to withdraw it . If you change your mind , or feel that it was n't a good investment , it can be difficult to change without taking a hit financially . Annuities are a bad investment vehicle if you have liquidity issues . The second is that if your 're not receiving a rate that will outpace inflation and cover fees , you can actually lose money . If the guaranteed rate say , is 2 % , but the fees are 1 % and inflation is 1.5 % , you are actually losing money . The same could be said if the money invested in the annuity could have brought a higher return invested elsewhere . It 's important to really have a good advisor when looking at annuities , especially fixed ones , to ensure you get the best return possible . Thank you for asking !
Fixed Index Annuities -LRB- FIA 's -RRB- are annuities that have the security of a guaranteed interest rate along with the potential to earn more based on the performance of a market index or indexes . Fixed Index Annuities are often interchanged with the term Equity Indexed Annuities , but FIA 's can be tied to indexes other than the stock market . The premium for a Fixed Index Annuity can go in as a simply payment or be paid over time . The potential for growth in an Indexed Annuity is greater than a Fixed Annuity due to the participation in the indexes . However , it maintains the security of the guaranteed interest rate of a Fixed Annuity .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
end question
start question
annuities
Does Rmd Apply To Annuities ?
RMDs are required minimum distributions fro a qualified plan that must be generated at age 701/2 . All qualified retirement accounts are subject to the RMD regulation . This includes annuities in a qualified plan . Tax deferred annuities outside a qualified plan are not subject to the RMD distribution rules .
To build on what Steve wrote . Annuities can be a great tool to satisfy the RMD requirement . A Fixed Annuity can be `` Annuitized '' , meaning they take a portion , or all of the funds and create a yearly or monthly income to pay you for the rest of your life . This Annuitization will satisfy the RMD requirement . it will also maximize the amount of income you receive when compared to taking the standard RMD withdrawals . This can be accomplished through Annuitizing a Deferred Fixed Annuity , using an Income Rider on an Indexed Annuity , or transferring funds into a Lifetime Income Annuity .
RMDs -LRB- required minimum distributions -RRB- impact most qualified retirement plans . So whatever products were used to fund those are subject to RMDs , including annuities . The biggest impact of an annuity in a qualified plan is the loss of tax free basis and the special treatment it receives in lifetime annuitization . But in general terms annuities can be managed to comply with RMDs .
RMDs are required minimum distributions fro a qualified plan that must be generated at age 701/2 . All qualified retirement accounts are subject to the RMD regulation . This includes annuities in a qualified plan . Tax deferred annuities outside a qualified plan are not subject to the RMD distribution rules .
Yes , you can contribute to a 401k and IRA in the same year . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , it might be a good strategy to put in enough to qualify for the full employer match before contributing to an IRA . There are income qualifying rules for the traditional IRA . For married filing jointly or qualifying widow -LRB- er -RRB- and your modified adjusted gross income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- is less than $ 181,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 181,000 and $ 191,000 your contribution amount is reduced . For single , head of household or married filing separately and you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year , if your MAGI is less that $ 114,000 you can contribute up to $ 5500 -LRB- over age 50 the contribution limit is $ 6500 -RRB- . If your MAGI is between $ 114,000 and $ 129,000 your contribution amount is reduced . Traditional IRAs have a maximum age contribution limit of 70 and you must begin Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- by April 1 of the year following the year in which you turned age 70 . Roth IRAs have no age limits for contribution and have no RMD at age 70 . This could mean you have two RMDs in the same year . If you or your spouse participates in an employer sponsored retirement plan such as a 401k , the ability to deduct a contribution to a traditional IRA hinges on what your MAGI is on your tax return along with your filing status . There are some rather complicated formulas that relate to this and you should definitely seek advice from your tax preparer on anything tax related . As always , you should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
If you 're healthy -LRB- and even better if you 're married and your spouse is also healthy -RRB- you can leverage your RMDs -LRB- required minimum distributions -RRB- to purchase life insurance , that if set up correctly , can distribute a tax free lump sum that can be split among your beneficiaries . You could consider taking more distributions than your RMDs and do the same for your grandchildren .
Yes a pension is a qualified plan . Meaning you have not paid taxes on that money , so when you begin to take disbursements , it will be taxable @ your current income bracket . If you have not taken any distributions , you will be required to take a Required Minimum Distribution , or `` RMD '' , the year following your 70 & 6 months birthday.If you want to pass that money on to a beneficiary rather than use the money yourself . You can convert that fund to a Roth IRA , pay the tax now , & pass the money on to your beneficiaries later on.No RMD required in a Roth IRA . A living trust is the best instrument to insure that your wishes are carried out to the letter . A will is simply instructions to the probate court .
Qualified retirement plans like 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s -LRB- under ERISA -RRB- may use tax deferred annuities as a funding product . Using tax deferred annuities in a qualified plan subjects the annuity to the rules of RMD distribution and the re-characterization of basis as taxable as ordinary income at the plan participants effective tax bracket rate .
A tax deferred annuity is an insurance product . RMD is an acronym for required minimum distributions at age 701/2 in a qualified plan . You can have an annuity in a qualified plan as a funding vehicle . At age 701/2 , you would have to take required minimum distributions from your annuity -LRB- if that 's the only product in your plan . -RRB-
The differences between Annuities and IRA 's is pretty simple . IRA 's are considered qualified meaning you have to follow the limitations to how much you can contribute . Annuities by themselves do not have any limitations other than any limitations insurance companies put on them which are always higher . IRA 's are subject to RMD 's or required minimum distributions meaning at at 701/2 , you will be required to start taking distributions from your IRA as outlined in IRS rules .
That is a great question ! Insurance companies will set a commencement date far enough ahead into the future to show you an impressive number for your return , and that is the date by which you must have started taking your withdrawals . The truth is that you can take money out at any time , BUT - there are serious consequences if you are n't careful . An annuity is not a suitable product for someone who has cash flow issues , and might need the money sooner than later . I 'd advise you to look at your policy , and look for these things : Do I have a free withdrawal amount , if so , how much and when can I start taking it ? How long is the surrender period , and what are the charges ? -LRB- If the surrender period is ten years , that means every year during that period , whatever you withdraw will be subject to that fee , among likely others , as well as a federal penalty of 10 % if you are younger than 591/2 -RRB- The last thing to look at is what triggers if you pull money out . Does it start , or lock in a payment cycle for you ? Again , that could be disastrous if you are n't very careful . Let the money ride in there as long as you can afford to , -LRB- at least until you are 60 -RRB- and then start taking your withdrawals . Depending on how your annuity is structured , you may be required to start your rmd 's at the age of 701/2 . If you 'd like help with your specifics , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
The Roth IRA is a retirement savings vehicle . Choosing a Roth IRA over a traditional IRA gives you several clear advantages : 1 -RRB- Your Roth IRA grows tax free . 2 -RRB- During your retirement years you draw tax free income from your Roth IRA account . 3 -RRB- Because you 've already paid taxes on your Roth IRA , it hedges against the possibility of having a tax rate increase , thus causing more taxes to be taken out of your Roth IRA income stream during retirement . Remember , you will most likely have less write-offs when you retire . In retirement , you will have no dependents and could have your mortgage paid off . 4 -RRB- No required minimum distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- when you reach 701/2 . In retirement , you 'll thank yourself for having the foresight of a tax free income stream while your neighbors face the likelihood of an increased tax bite from their save traditional IRA .
The whole idea of a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is that you defer taxation on the deposit and the earnings of the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- until a later date . The assumption is that you will be avoiding a high tax now for a low tax later . The irony is that is not always the case . The IRS will not only tax your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- but they will force you to take withdrawals at a predetermined rate after you reach seventy and a half years of age , unless you are still working . While you can not avoid paying the tax , there are schemes that would allow you to take the Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMD -RRB- each year and hopefully preserve the money in the fund . However , when you die , your beneficiaries will have the privilege of paying the taxes on the money .
A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Heres how the Traditional IRA works : You must be under age 70 to contribute No maximum income restriction on eligibility to contribute Earned income must be greater than your annual Traditional IRA contributions Tax deferred growth Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Your deduction may be limited if you or your spouse are covered by a retirement plan at work and your income exceeds certain levels Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- must start by April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which you reach age 70 An advantage of Roth IRAs is the tax free distribution during retirement . One of the selling points of a Traditional IRA has been you defer the taxes . However , an often overlooked important detail is that in addition to deferring the taxes , you also defer the tax calculation . Who really knows what your specific tax rate will be during retirement ? You will likely not have the same deductions you had when you contributed to an IRA such as dependents and a mortgage . Then there is the general question of do you think taxes are going up or down in the future ? There could be a great advantage to having a Roth IRA if you can handle paying the taxes on the money upfront when you put it into the Roth account . Theres something about the comfort of a stream of retirement income that is tax free that makes it very attractive . Based on the small number of companies that offer pension plans , people largely find themselves on their own when it comes to preparing for retirement . Both the Traditional IRA and the Roth IRA can be helpful retirement income vehicles . As always , you need to consult with a qualified financial person that can make sure your individual situation and needs are taken into consideration when determining which is most appropriate for you .
Yes , if your company offers both you can have both , however the total contribution for both accounts combined can not exceed the IRS contribution limits between the two accounts . The value in having both is for tax diversification in the future . The traditional 401K will require taxes to be paid on distributions in the future , and is subject to RMD , where the Roth is not .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
The good news is that annuity income is usually reported by the insurance company issuing the annuity . When they make a disbursement they also issue appropriate documentation to assist in filing your taxes . They send identical information to the Internal Revenue Service . Generally speaking when money is withdrawn from an annuity it is treated as interest and then taxed as ordinary income until the interest is exhausted and only the basis -LRB- the sum of premiums paid -RRB- remains . That money can be recovered free of income tax . If the annuity is annuitized , that is paid out in monthly installments either over an extended period of time or the lifetime of the annuitant , then an exclusion factor is determined and applied to each payment . A part of each payment will be taxed as ordinary income . The bad news is that these principles apply to non-qualified annuities held by individuals and these barely touch all the situations that can arise and the taxation of those unique situations . While this response is not meant to take the place of legal and accounting professional advice it should alert you to some of the complexities of taxing annuities . The most obvious situation is when an annuity is held as an asset of qualified pension plan . This includes defined benefit plans ; defined contribution plans -LRB- 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , IRAs and many others . The income taken by these plans is taxed as ordinary income unless it is taken prior to age fifty-nine and a half . If taken earlier it could be subject to a penalty tax of an additional ten per cent . Where annuities taxation becomes complex is when deferred annuities are transferred . That is when a person gives another person an annuity on their life , or the life of a third party . The basic rule is that the transfer is treated as surrender and taxed accordingly . The annuity that is transferred is treated as having been fully paid . It then has a basis of the value that was taxed . For estate planning reasons the ownership of an annuity is sometimes held by a trust and this leads to another set of taxation considerations involving the non-natural person rule . Who is going to be taxed is the basic issue and this can be quite tangled . Of course there are exceptions to all of these rules . Taxation is fairly straightforward if the annuity is annuitized . State laws concerning probate can create some unexpected outcomes and taxation . When an individual owns an annuity and the annuitant is another person , perhaps a spouse , the death of the owner triggers the beneficiary provision and another third person could suddenly own the contract upsetting the intentions of the couple , even if it is a child . Many of the taxation rules are specific to individual insurance companies and it is wise to carefully make sure that the company you select from whom to purchase the annuity follows the procedures that will maintain your plan and keep taxation as uncomplicated as possible . Absent all other plans , the IRS frequently calls for a liquidation of a transferred annuity within five years . The key is the desire to get the tax question settled .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Is Car Insurance Calculated ?
There are many factors in determining rates for auto insurance . Age and experience of driver . Driving record . In some states your credit . Type of vehicle , Annual mileage , Coverage 's requested . Marital status . Location or garaging address . Occupation . These are just some of the many factors without getting into discounts that are taken into consideration for auto insurance rates .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
This is really dependent upon the company through which you 're insured . Not all companies use the same scale when it comes to insurance scored . There are many different ways to use financial data to compile an insurance score , and each company gets to choose how it 's calculated . The funny thing is that they probably ca n't tell you how it 's calculated because they probably do n't know . They 'll pay an outside vendor whose business is to compile this data into a score , and there are many different models by which they do this . I 've seen scores as high as 900 and as low as 400 . However , this does n't really mean anything until you can determine what your score means to your premium . Every company applies credits to a different degree . For some , 600 may be a big discount . For others , 600 is considered rather low . it all depends on your company and how they apply credits . In general , your insurance score will follow your credit score , the higher , the better . To find out how that applies to you , talk to an agent you can trust and they 'll explain how it works for your company .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
After January 1 , 2014 individual health and small group -LRB- 2 to 50 employees -RRB- healthinsurance is calculated on a community rated basis . Essentially a rate table is established for each insurance product with a corresponding rate amount for each year of age for a person enrolled . There is a rate for someone at age 25 , and slightly different rate for age 26 and so on for each year of age . For carriers applying the pure age rating approach it is a matter of telling an individual your rate at this age is `` X '' amount of dollars , for someone covering dependents it is a process of adding the rate for the subscriber , their spouse and/or dependent children -LRB- up to a maximum of 3 dependent children -RRB- for their various ages and that it the total rate for the individual plus dependents . Dependent children over age 21 are added to the cost as an adult . This is the individual insurance carriers and most small group carriers are now calculating their rates . As you might guess , for small businesses this can result in employees with the same level of enrollment coverage -LRB- e.g. - Employee Only -RRB- having different rates which is a headache from an accounting and employer contribution calculation perspective . Some small group carriers do the age calculation that I have described earlier , divide the total by the amount of enrollees in each coverage class -LRB- e.g. - Employee Only , Employee + Spouse , Family -RRB- and come up with a composite rate that yields a uniform rate for each level of enrollment . How the insurance carrier has filed their products with your state insurance commission will determine which style of rates you see from different insurance carriers . However , the underlying rate methodology is the same .
The best way to calculate how much homeowner 's insurance you need is to do an estimated replacement cost on your home . This takes about 5 minutes and it involves determining the square footage of your home along with many other calculations . A licensed broker can quickly calculate the needed information and provide a free quote for the entire policy package .
A life insurance professional can provide a customized analysis using one of the conventional methods which center on a capital needs analysis . The calculations look at how much you need as a lump sum to create an income for your family . For a high level view , you can run some numbers yourself . There are a wide variety of online calculators available such as this one : WEBSITELINK Online calculators can help you visualize the need and better prepare you for a planning discussion with your agent who will help you ensure you have the right amount of life insurance .
There are two popular and entirely different purposes to calculate present value of annuities . 1 -RRB- * Calculating retirement funding needs . Suppose you are planning to retire next month and want to purchase a fixed annuity with guaranteed interest rate of 3 % that will immediately start providing you with $ 25,000 of annual retirement income over the next 25 years . Being able to calculate present value of annuities helps you see the lump sum you will need to pay for your annuity -LRB- in this case , approx $ 435,330 -RRB- . 1 -RRB- * Calculating loan payments . Using the same example in reverse , let 's say you had a $ 435,330 mortgage at 3 % and you wanted to pay it off in 25 years . Purchasing an annuity for that amount would allow you to make payments of $ 25,000 per year for the next 25 years . * Both of these are overly simplistic examples . Talk to a licensed agent versed in annuities for specific annuity details .
Indexed annuities are different from other fixed annuities because of the way it credits interest to your annuity 's value . Some fixed annuities only credit interest calculated at a rate set in the contract . Other fixed annuities also credit interest at rates set from time to time by the insurance company . Indexed Annuities credit interest using a formula based on changes in the index to which the fixed indexed annuity is linked . The formula decides how the additional interest , if any , is calculated and credited . How much additional interest you get and when you get it depends on the features of your particular contract ?
Home insurance is really pretty simple . There are 6 basic coverage parts : Coverage A : Dwelling -LRB- the actual home -RRB- Coverage B : Other Structures -LRB- any detached buildings -RRB- Coverage C : Personal Property -LRB- your `` stuff '' -RRB- Coverage D : Loss of Use Coverage E : Personal Liability -LRB- if your sued -RRB- Coverage F : Medical Payments Coverage A , the dwelling , is the coverage that the other property coverages are calculated from . The right amount depends on the home and how you want claims to be settled . The two basic settlement options are Replacement Cost or Actual Cash Value . Replacement cost is the amount it would take to rebuild your home just like it is . Actual Cash Value is the amount your home is worth . Most people want their home replaced if it 's damaged so most will use Replacement Cost . There is an industry standard estimator that insurance companies use to estimate this . Your insurance agent will be able to estimate this based on the construction and features of your home . Actual Cash Value will take that number and depreciate it . Getting the dwelling amount right is the most important calculation for your insurance . Coverage B is usually 10 % of Coverage A and Coverage C is usually anywhere from 50 % -75 % of Coverage A. Coverage D can be anywhere from 20 % of Coverage A to unlimited . Every company is different . Coverage E is also a very important coverage as this protects your assets in the case someone sues you . How much is right for you ? I usually insure the home for it 's replacement cost and I usually recommend a Personal Liability Limit of at least $ 500,000 . Find an agent you can trust and he/she will be happy to show you many different options and how that computes to premiums . Then you can make an informed decision .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
In general the color of a car does not factor into rate calculation . I often hear this myth that red cars are more expensive to insure . If thief wants to steal they might often looks for a car that is easy to steal and could care less about the car 's color . If actuarial records could show that there is a higher propensity to steal certain color of cars then that might be factored into the comprehensive portion of the rates .
The conventional approach is to go through a `` needs analysis '' . This method attempts to determine the minimum acceptable amount of coverage you `` need '' in order to meet your stated objectives , such as final expenses , college costs , mortgage payoff , emergency fund , etc. . It is a math calculation based on your estimate of variables such as inflation , taxes , and rate of return . A more meaningful approach is to simply decide how much of your income you want to continue to your family when you die and for how long . After all , it 's your income that ultimately pays for all the individual items mentioned above . Then , an amount of coverage can be calculated based on the same assumptions as in the needs analysis .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
There are many factors that go into the rating of your policy . One of those is the base rate your insurance company files with the state . Everything is calculated off the base rate and insurance companies usually adjust their rates at least once per year . There will be a rate effective date buried somewhere within your policy but you may not see it easily . They will adjust their rates based on their experience for the last year and they can go up or down depending on how the claims have been . You 'll also see the coverage A -LRB- dwelling -RRB- get adjusted every year . As construction costs change , so will the coverage on your home -LRB- just a hint , they usually do n't go down -RRB- . Then there are a few other factors that may affect your rates : insurance score , claims , changes in coverage or deductibles . They all go into the rating calculation . Do yourself a favor and read your renewal -LRB- you 'd be surprised how many people do n't -RRB- . You 'll be able to track what 's happening and look for anything that might not be right . If you have a question , talk to your agent . He/she should be happy to go through it with you .
Premiums increase is some policies and not in others , depending on the type of contract . One thing that does increase each year is the mortality cost -LRB- the chance of dying -RRB- . How the increasing mortality cost is dealt with has a large impact on the premium . For example with a 5 year renewable term plan you pay a level premium for 5 years and the excess over the yearly cost in invested to smooth out the premium . With a permanent level premium plan the insurance company actuaries do a calculation based on factors including morality cost , expense interest rate . They need an end so age 100 is often used . The calculation determines how much is needed to be pay on a level premium base . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
There is a website called dailycalculators.com where you can find a tool to calculate IRR -LRB- Internal Rate of Return -RRB- on a life insurance policy . Once you get to the website you will find a link to connect this particular calculator . It is much easier than calculating it yourself .
There are some life insurance calculators that you can use to determine how much term life insurance you need . WEBSITELINK is a website that has free calculators designed to help you determine your term life insurance needs . Some people use the figure of 10 times their annual income .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Will I Get If I Cash In My Life Insurance ?
If you own Term life insurance , there will be no cash to cash in . However , if you own Return of Premium -LRB- ROP -RRB- Term , and have held onto the policy long enough , you will be able to get back part or all of the premium you paid in . If you cash in Whole Life or Universal Life , the amount you get back is stated in a current policy illustration . That amount is called the surrender value . You can order a current illustration from your life insurance company or agent .
Life Insurance can be `` cashed '' in providing there is a cash value available . In your policy there is a surrender value which is what you will receive . If you have taken a loan thwn this will be paid back first . Any monies over the premium you have paid in may cause a taxable event to be paid the tax year the policy is surrendered .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
It may not be a good idea to get more life insurance after getting a new mortgage . You may have enough already . Heres how you could find out . Ask yourself the following : Do I have enough coverage so that my spouse can pay off the mortgage if I pass away ? What if I take out a second mortgage ? Do I have enough coverage for that as well ? What if I feel I have enough coverage for both the mortgage and my dependents - but then have another kid ? Then I would need more of the benefit to replace my income , and so would have less to cover the bank debt . How about any other family obligations ? Are my parents financially secure ? Any chance one or both would become dependent on me ? If so , that would create a demand for more coverage . Any business obligations ? Is my partnership agreement funded ? The services of my key people indemnified ? Bank debt insured ? Estate preservation ? Charitable gifts ? Can you see where I am headed with all these questions ? If you have completed a financial needs analysis , covering both current and future needs for life insurance , then you could be pretty sure whether or not you have enough coverage . If you are like most other people , you dont . You will probably end up buying another policy :-RRB- .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
end question
start question
life-insurance
When Can I Borrow Against My Life Insurance ?
You can borrow from your life insurance when there is enough cash value built up in the policy from which to borrow . You can see this amount by ordering a current illustration of your policy from your life insurance agent who sold you the policy , or from the life insurance company through which the policy was purchased .
A life insurance loan is borrowing funds from the cash value inside of a life insurance policy . You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you take a loan against your policy , the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies . If the insured person under the policy dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
The answer how much you can borrow depends on who you choose as our life insurance company and how long you have had your policy , along with the type of policy you buy . In order to borrow against your policy , it must not be a term policy , but only a permanent policy . Permanent policies include Equity Indexed Universal Life , Universal Life , along with Whole Life . I personally prefer Equity Indexed Whole Life polities because they tend to build up the highest amounts of Cash Value . It is that Cash Value against which you are allowed to borrow . The percentage of Cash Value you can borrow varies from company to company . With life insurance sold by Premier Financial Alliance , and its flagship carrier , 167 year old National Life Group , you can borrow an extremely high percentage of your cash value , frequently around 90 % . This allows you to keep your policy open and in force . You even earn income on the money borrowed while you have it . You do not have to ever repay the money and you then keep it tax free , so long as the policy is open . Do not close a permanent policy after borrowing against it , as then the money you take becomes taxable . Leave a death benefit for your beneficiary and you help them and you . Thank you . GARY LANE . Premier Financial Alliance . 7144229616 . garylane@cox.net .
In Canada , when you borrow against your life insurance policy the amount you can borrow in stated in the life insurance policy . Important to remember , when you ask for a loan quote , to ask what if any of the amount borrowed will be taxable . Borrowing against a policy directly from the insurance company is considered a `` deemed disposition '' and can trigger a taxable event . When / if you repay the amount you receive a `` tax credit '' . Borrowing directly is private . If you use the policy as collateral from a bank , the loan is not a `` deemed disposition '' and therefore does not trigger a taxable event . The amount you can borrow varies , however , guidelines range from 50 % to 90 % depending on the type of policy and investment . There are consequence and alternatives to borrowing they should be discussed with a good local agent to ensure that you are informed . On a planning note , there are a number of strategies , that leverage individual and corporate borrowing . If you have further questions , contact me . If you are in Nova Scotia , you can request a complimentary strategy session at www.jpw.ca .
You can contact the insurance company to request to borrow funds from the policy -LRB- your company 's policyholder services department should be able to handle it - they may request you complete a form for written documentation purposes -RRB- . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . I would recommend consulting with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
At no time in the life of Term policies do they have cash value to borrow against , so no you can not borrow against a term policy . Additionally you can not use a term life policy as collateral for a loan as you can with a Whole Life policy . Credit term policies are designed to pay off a debt in the case of death of the debtor before the credit is repaid . On the other hand , Whole Life policies have cash value , grow wealth tax free , may be used as collateral and may be borrowed against . Contact me for more information .
Is borrowing against a policy a good idea ? Yes , it can be , it can depend though . Keeping the policy in force is important as it creates some tax advantages on the funds borrowed as you are essentially taking a part of your death benefit early for use elsewhere . Where borrowing against your life insurance is a good idea is in what steps you have to take to do compared to other avenues . Have you ever sat in a bank office cubicle while someone else decides if your need is worthy enough ? How they have to decide if your need fits ? A great thing about borrowing against your value is you simply make a call and the money is wired to your bank account . You are not asked to explain your need , your need is not subjected to review by somebody else . Simply put , what you want to do with those funds is not subject to the approval of somebody else .
Borrowing against a 401k is both a yes and no answer as to debt . No it is not traditional debt as showing against your credit score or debt to earnings ratio , because you are borrowing your own money . It is debt as Jim mentioned , because it must be repaid within 9 months . The tax and penalty consequences are much worse than borrowing the money from a lender . It is never advised to borrow from your 401k because you are borrowing from your own future . A simple rule is if you need money today while you are able to earn an income , you will need money when you are old and sick and ca n't earn an income .
You can borrow against permanent life insurance -LRB- also called cash value life insurance -RRB- policies that have enough cash value for borrowing . The two major types of permanent life insurance are Whole Life and Universal Life . Universal life includes fixed universal life , indexed universal life and variable universal life . It is imperative to make sure that you do n't borrow too much from the policy and cause it to lapse . A lapsed policy with a loan against it can result in tax implications for the policy owner .
If you have permanent , cash value life insurance , yes you may borrow against it . Be aware that some policies will end up lapsing if you borrow too much on them , so be careful and check . If , on the other hand , you have an Equity Indexed Universal Life Policy , you should have the highest appreciation in your equity for borrowing purposes . Some , like some products sold by Premier Financial Alliance , actually do not go down at all when the stock market goes down , but only go up -LRB- with caps -RRB- , as the stock market goes up . These can have he largest amount against which you can borrow , totally tax free . I highly recommend these products . See your PFA agent . Glad to help . GARY LANE . garylane@cox.net . 7144229616 . Thanks .
Only the owner of a permanent life insurance policy can borrow against life insurance . Term insurance does not have cash value , so only those who own Whole or Universal Life will have the cash value from which to borrow . If the owner and insured person are two different people , the insured person can not borrow against the policy . That privilege belongs only to the policy owner .
Borrowing against a life insurance policy requires cash value inside that policy . Term life insurance does n't have cash value , but whole life insurance policies may . So , you would need to have a whole life policy with Global Life Insurance in order to be able to borrow against it . Call up your company and ask if you have any cash value inside your policy and what the borrowing options and costs are .
As long as your Globe Life insurance policy has accrued a cash value and there are not any outstanding loans against that balance then you can borrow against it . Loans on a permanent life insurance policy are meant to be paid back -LRB- in most scenarios -RRB- . To maximize the life insurance products be careful and advise a financial advisor or agent prior to borrowing against the cash value in your policy .
When borrowing from a life insurance policy , you 're borrowing monies from its cash value - this is only available on permanent programs -LRB- cash value does n't build inside term insurance policies -RRB- . You can only borrow up to the amount available in the cash value - this figure typically goes up over time . Review your annual statement or call your agent/the carrier to find out the current cash value available inside the policy . Keep in mind , when you borrow from your policy 's cash value , you are in effect creating a loan because you are expected to pay back the borrowed amount - and with any loan , there is an interest rate attached . The longer it 's kept out , the more interest that is charged . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan against the policy , the loan amount plus any interest is subtracted from the death benefit and the difference is given to the beneficiary .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is The Weight Limit For Health Insurance ?
Under the Afforable Care Act , you can not be declined for health insurance due to a pre-existing condition or other health-related issue including being overweight . You have the option to secure a bronze , silver , gold , or platinum level plan - please note , not every carrier offers a plan under each level -LRB- e.g. company XYZ may only offer bronze , silver , and gold plans , but not platinum plans -RRB- . Individuals under age 30 also have the option of securing a catastrophic plan . If you qualify for a subsidy , you would want to look into plans ON the health insurance exchanges . If you do n't qualify for one , you may want to look into plans OFF the exchanges as you will generally have more options available to you . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker if you 're looking for coverage or want to review your existing insurance to see if a better option is available . We have an in-depth knowledge of products from many different carriers and can help you determine the plan that 's going to best serve your needs and your budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
A medical exam for the coverage typically consists of a paramedical exam -LRB- height/weight check and vitals checks such as pulse and blood pressure readings -RRB- , a blood test , and a urine test - sometimes an EKG and/or cognitive testing may be required for older age individuals -RRB- . Even if it 's not asked specifically on the application itself , the carrier will see the input regarding the wls -LRB- I 'm assuming stands for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- surgery in the APS from your doctor . For any fully underwritten life insurance program , the carrier will request a copy of an APS from your doctor , in addition to the completion of a medical exam conducted for the insurance policy -RRB- . An APS is an Attending Physician Statement - in short , it 's a doctor 's summary of your medical history records . For example , if you were being treated for diabetes , it would cite your A1C reading history , prescriptions prescribed for the condition , when it was diagnosed , etc. . In the APS , the carrier will see in the doctor 's notes that you have discussed getting the wls surgery -LRB- I 'm assuming that `` wls '' is supposed to stand for `` weight loss surgery '' -RRB- and ask if a surgery has been scheduled and/or completed . If it has n't been completed yet , a carrier will postpone approving you for the coverage because you have an outstanding medical procedure on the books that 's still supposed to get done . From a carrier 's perspective , their risk of a claim is greatly increased when they know a surgical operation is upcoming as complications can always occur during any surgery . Please note , after a weight loss surgery procedure and you 've ideally lost a large amount of weight and want to apply for coverage , part of that weight loss can be added in to a carrier 's calculation of height/weight profile . The reason for this is quick weight loss for people -LRB- whether via surgery , diet and exercise , liposuction , etc. -RRB- can often result in some individuals gaining a percentage of that weight back - unfortunately not everyone always keeps all of the pounds off . So if you apply for coverage within 12 months of that rapid weight loss , a carrier may add half the weight loss amount back to your total . For example , if you weight 300 pounds and loss 120 pounds after a procedure , now you 're sitting at 180 pounds . If you applied for coverage soon after having lost that 120 pounds , the carrier would add 60 back to your total and base the underwriting on a height/weight profile of 240 pounds -LRB- 180 +60 -RRB- . The purpose of the 12 month differential is to show stability in the person 's weight loss and that they have a good chance of keeping off the weight . Please also note , alternative options will still result in the same outcome -LRB- e.g. non-medical life insurance -RRB- because a question on almost every application will ask in some format `` are there any outstanding tests or other medical procedures outstanding or waiting to be completed '' . You would only be able to secure a graded policy with a low face amount -LRB- $ 25k or $ 50k maximum -RRB- , which does not appear to be in the ballpark of the coverage you 're looking to secure -LRB- you noted $ 900k in your question 's statement -RRB- . If you have a policy already in force , you can elect to convert all or a portion of it to permanent coverage . The conversion would keep the risk class that the original policy had and would simply just calculate the rates based on your age . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
Yes , most people can get life insurance if they are overweight . Some things that might create a difficulty are if they also have a serious health condition such as uncontrolled diabetes or recent heart attack , or if their weight is in the morbidly obese category . However , there are many policies with lenient weight limits , and there is at least one policy in almost every state that does not have any weight limit at all . Some of these will work for persons with health conditions , as well , and some of them will even pay 100 % of the death benefit from day one -LRB- are not graded -RRB- . You need to work with agencies that carry a variety of policies like this so that you can get the most affordable overweight life insurance premium .
Medicare will pay for weight loss surgery if the BMI is over 35 , if there is a health condition related to obesity that will be cured or alleviated by losing weight through the weight loss surgery , if weight loss must occur before treatment can be effectively undertaken for another health problem , and if other treatments are not expected to work to produce sufficient weight loss . There is a psychological evaluation done prior to surgery to make sure it should be done .
There are a number of No Exam life insurance products that do not consider weight at all in determining whether an applicant is qualified for obtaining a life insurance policy . And a smaller number will even issue a policy that is not graded , despite having no weight limit . With the latter , one 's health must be pretty good in order to qualify for the policy . However , the rates for those policies will be considerably higher , so if someone is just overweight and not obese , getting a medically underwritten life insurance policy usually -LRB- but definitely not always -RRB- costs less . With a wide range of products to choose from , those who are not in the normal weight limit can find the most affordable overweight life insurance .
It sounds like you have a decision to make : A. postpone or cancel your elective weight loss surgery so that you can get the life insurance now , or B.postpone getting life insurance until after you have your weight loss surgery . If you have found a policy for which you qualify weight wise , are not suffering health complications from your weight , and need $ 900,000 of coverage for a loan or other reason , you could probably qualify by simply postponing your surgery for a year . Of course , if your health is at risk , getting the surgery can not only help your health , but improve your life insurance rates in the future .
Your weight is a significant aspect in the underwriting process . Too heavy a build can mean higher rates or an outright decline for a person seeking the best possible rates for themselves . What you have to understand about underwriting is an underwriter has to make a `` guess '' based on your information one time . They can not track your health over time and adjust cost as the policy goes . The problem with excess weight is it can be traced to other health conditions which lower life expectancy , which either drives up cost or leads to a decline . An insured can however after a year or so , ask for the insurance company to reconsider their rating if they have lost weight and can show some consistency in maintaining the weight loss .
Being overweight affects life insurance differently , depending on what type of policy you are getting . If you are getting a No Exam policy that gives you a set rate just for qualifying , then your weight will not make a difference , just as long as you do not weigh over the maximum amount . Some policies have no weight limit at all . If you are applying for a policy that does require medical underwriting , fluctuations of just a few pounds can cause your rate to go up . If you start out just slightly overweight , this increase may not make a lot of difference , or you may even find one company that will rate you much lower than the rest . But if you are quite overweight , the price increase can be large , or you can even be declined . Weight is one of those areas where it really helps to shop around . Not only do different companies have different weight charts , but sometimes going with a No Exam policy can beat the price of one requiring an exam , when the applicant is overweight or obese . Using an agency that specializes in overweight life insurance can certainly help save time , money and frustration .
Medicare will cover weight loss programs when weight has a direct impact on health . Some health conditions that may be alleviated by weight loss are sleep apnea , hypertension , joint pain , and diabetes type 2 . Medicare will pay for 3 hours of weight management counseling the first year and two hours of counseling each year after that . If further treatment is needed , Medicare can provide more , including gastric bypass surgery , if needed .
Most people can get life insurance when they are overweight . If your weight falls in the morbidly obese category , and if you are under age 45 , it is harder to find coverage than when you are older , but there are a few options . Those whose BMI -LRB- body mass index -RRB- is in the obese range will have more choices . Contrary to what generally applies to those with normal weight , sometimes a No Exam policy can be the least expensive choice for obese individuals . Not having to take an exam can also be helpful if the overweight person has not seen a doctor in a while , as it takes away the risk of the blood test showing high blood sugar , high cholesterol , or other labs sometimes associated with excess weight . No matter which route you go , consulting an agency that carries a variety of products can be helpful , so that you can be matched up with the one that has your best price . Do n't neglect to inform your agent of any weight lost in the past year , as most companies will add back half of that to your current weight , when determining your rate class .
Yes , most people can get some type of life insurance policy if overweight , even if you are morbidly obese -LRB- do n't you hate that label -RRB- . There are a handful of companies that will provide first day coverage -LRB- no graded period -RRB- without any weight requirement at all . Most policies that disregard weight will have a graded period , where the death benefit paid during the first couple of years would be reduced for death due to natural causes . Some simplified issue polices -LRB- no exam needed -RRB- have very liberal weight charts . These can be a good choice , especially if you have not had your blood tested for a while . There are also some fully underwritten policies that have much more lenient weight charts than others . If you are applying for a large policy , certain companies can save you thousands of dollars . Be sure to contact an impaired risk or overweight life insurance expert for your life insurance if you are significantly overweight . Not only do you need a variety of choices , you need the experience of someone who knows how to maneuver the factors involved : weight changes over the past year , health conditions that can be associated with build , etc. .
There may be some plans that offer discounts on weight loss programs or gym memberships but generally your health will not cover a weight loss program you purchase over the counter . Every health insurance plan is different however and may offer at least some type of coverage depending on the weight loss program , is it medically necessary and prescribed by the doctor . Check with your agent to see what your policy covers .
Medicare will pay for weight loss programs under certain conditions . Some things to know are : Medicare will pay for weight loss programs only if weight loss is needed to treat certain health conditions related to being overweight , or is needed before surgery to reduce the risk of complications . Up to three hours of individual counseling about weight loss is provided the first year , and two hours per year after that . If you need more treatment than that , Medicare may pay for more with a doctor 's prescription and if the treatment is medially approved by Medicare .
Life insurance insurance rates are determined by a very complex equation that the insurance carrier has developed . Some the things that will be taken into consideration in this equation will be your height , weight , your habits , your medical history and your families medical history . Your weight is only part of the whole equation depending on how far outside of the federal height and weight guidelines for your sex will determine how much your weight will affect your rate . Getting a rate for coverage is typically free and I would recommend contacting a local agent to discuss coverage availability and pricing .
All personal auto insurance policies will have a vehicle weight limit for the vehicles they cover . While most will cover the policyholder in other vehicles , the coverage will not apply in vehicles that exceed that weight limit . You will need to read your specific policy to know exactly which Uhaul trucks would be covered . It may be only the smaller ones or it may be none at all .
Based on data compiled for health insurance plans in 2014 with the new mandated coverage under the Affordable Care Act , the weighted average of a benchmark -LRB- silver , or 70 % benefit level -RRB- health insurance plan in Kansas is $ 260 ; which is below the $ 328 national weighted average . As for current Kansas averages , the 2013 data is not accurately completed and compiled yet . But by best estimates of 2013 data , the average premium in Kansas is $ 182 , but does not disclose or reflect benefit levels or type of coverage -LRB- the national average benefit level is 78 % -RRB- . So , in conclusion , a resident of Kansas can expect to pay on average $ 182 for a health plan the remainder of 2013 , and then $ 260 starting 2014 -LRB- a 43 % increase from 2013 , which is in line with the national weighted average of overall premium increases -RRB- . But , premiums vary widely across the state and by county , and by age .
As a general rule , a `` tummy tuck '' is viewed as cosmetic surgery and is not covered by health insurance polices . However , obesity is becoming an increasing problem in our nation.This has resulted in a growing number of people who have reached health or life threatening levels of morbid obesity for which they have had either prescription and/or surgical treatments that result in extreme weight loss . In some cases the weight gain has stretched the person 's skin to such an extent that after their extreme weight loss following treatment their skin does not return to normal levels and the person is left with folds of skin which can , in some cases , become sources of medical problems themselves -LRB- e.g. - severe rashes and infections -RRB- . In these extreme circumstances the insurance company may agree that it is an issue of medical necessity that this issue be surgically addressed and the will approve coverage for the removal or lifting of this excess skin tissue . This has been the only circumstance where I have seen an insurance carrier approve what might be construed as a tummy tuck .
Medicare can cover gastric bypass surgery under certain conditions . Some of those are : 1 -RRB- BMI must be 35 or greater . 2 -RRB- There must be at least one health condition related to weight . 3 -RRB- There must be documentation of failure to lose weight by other methods . 4 -RRB- A psychological evaluation is required . 5 -RRB- Other medical treatments for weight loss have been ruled out . 6 -RRB- The provider and type of surgery must be approved by Medicare .
Body Mass Index -LRB- BMI -RRB- does impact the premium for life insurance . BMI or simply the height and weight of the proposed life insured is a key factor in preferred risk guidelines . Favorable height and weight combinations can mean preferred rates . Average combinations will mean standard rates as a starting point for underwriting . Unfavorable combinations may mean substandard rates at best . Height and weight charts can vary significantly by life insurer . An independent life insurance professional can survey a wide variety of insurers to help you select the best ones to apply with for the best possible outcome .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Can You Switch Homeowners Insurance At Any Time ?
Switching homeowner 's insurance is relatively easy to do and most times , you can change at a date that is suitable to you . The biggestconcernis whether the new company will accept your application . Assuming you have few or no claims , and meet their underwriting guidelines , you should be able to switch . Just as importantly is the issue of whether it is a good idea to change . As an independentbroker , that 's part of our job is todetermineif making a change makes good financial sense for you . If not , you should stay put .
You can switch your auto policy at any time . The most popular motivation to switch insurance carriers is price . People are looking for the best price for there insurance all the time . Other reasons to switch would be a new car purchase or moving to a new state . Switching carriers is easy and there are many to choose from . Shopping your auto insurance around is a great idea to compare prices . Using and agent can help you find insurance carriers that you normally would not have access to but going direct to and insurer online is also beneficial cutting out a middle man and getting quotes instantly . Be sure to check the term dates , is it six months or a year policy ? This can effect the way you compare the premiums . You will want to match your old coverage with your new quotes . Make sure the coverages are the same or similar this can prevent a coverage gap where you thought you had coverage . If you new vehicle is n't so new any more you may want to lower the amount of coverage on a particular vehicle . This can help lower your premium on the new policy or you can amend you current one . So while you can switch you insurer at any time do your research and make sure that it works in your favor .
This is a common question most people have and the answer is yes , you can switch your insurance at any time . There is no mandate which states that you can not switch your insurance but the question is should you switch your insurance ? There are several things you want to consider before switching your auto insurance . The most common reason people switch their insurance is because of price . You will find that most states file insurance rates in January and June . So keep in mind depending on when you decide to switch your policy you could be hitting a price increase or decrease depending on what the state has filed . Switching your insurance once or even several times could actually hurt you . Companies are beginning to offer discounts such as loyalty discounts which dont kick in until you have been with them for so many years . Even though you may be saving $ 50 - $ 100 switching to another carrier you could be losing a lot more than that by not staying with your current insurance company . You may find loyalty discounts to range from 5 % -20 % depending on the company which could save you hundreds of dollars . But every situation is different so be sure to consider when your switching your insurance and what discounts you may or may not be losing .
In most circumstances it probably doesnt make any difference when you switch auto policies . Cancellations are treated on a pro-rata basis by many insurance companies . Doing a switch at renewal might be easiest , though . When considering a switch there are two things to consider . The first is the effect dropping coverage with one company might have on the premiums of other insurance policies that might have been bundled . The second is that switching frequently to save a few dollars does not allow you to develop any relationship with the agent , who might be your best friend at the time of a claim .
If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan you can switch to a Medigap Plan during AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period -RRB- . Unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Plan . There are other times during the year that you can switch from a Medicare Advantage Plan to Medigap . If you have Guaranteed Issue Rights , you can purchase a Medigap Plan in your state during your Guaranteed Issue period . Some Guaranteed Issue situations include : 1 . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area . 2 . You move out of your Plan 's service area . 3 . You joined a MA / MAPD when your were first eligible for Medicare Part A at 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide to switch back to Original Medicare . 4 . You dropped a Medigap Policy to join a MA / MAPD for the first time . You 've been in the Plan less than a year and you want to switch back . 5 . You leave a MA / MAPD because the company has n't ' followed the rules -- or misled you . MA = -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- MAPD = -LRB- Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug -RRB- Thank you for reading my response .
You are allowed to switch from a Medicare Advantage plan under certain conditions . If you are 65 or older and have been on Medicare Part B for less than 6 months you can switch to original Medicare and a Medigap . If you are in your Advantage trial right period , you can switch to Medigap . If you can pass underwriting requirements , you can switch to Medigap .
As often as you like if you are referring to the actual policy . If you are referring to the writing company , you are free to search the market every year . Normally you will see homeowners insurance policies creep up every year . This is because most policies have an inflation guard built into the policy . It is designed to cover the increased cost of construction over time . Typically it is about 3 % -6 % . It can become a hassle to switch your homeowners insurance on a yearly basis because the company will come out and perform an inspection and can cancel the policy if they see something they do n't like . Also , eventually you will run out of companies to switch from/to . I would look to your independent insurance agent for the best advice .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
There is no fee that I am aware of to switch from one insurance company to another . The only reason that I am aware of that you want to switch insurance companies is lower cost . If there is a fee involved then you probably will not switch insurance companies . There is no fee to my knowledge to switch
While this is a serious tax question it could make sense to do this switch . A Roth IRA accumulates money for retirement and there isnt any tax on the accumulation prior to withdrawal . When you withdraw funds from a Roth IRA you will not have any taxes to pay ! Check with your accountant before making this switch as there could be serious income tax consequences in the year that you make the switch .
You can switch your Medicare Supplement anytime you want to as long as you can pass medical underwriting . If you have any serious pre-existing health conditions you may not be able to switch to another company . If you can qualify with a new company you and your wife will probably be able to save a lot of money and still receive good coverage for the gaps in your Original Medicare Part A and Part B coverage . If you currently have a Plan F consider switching to a Plan G or Plan N.
A homeowners policy much like an auto policy can be cancelled and taken up with another carrier at any time . Any portion of premiums that have been paid and not used should be refunded by the carrier . If you wish to switch carriers at any point in time you may do so .
If your homeowners insurance is escrowed do n't sweat it . Typically switching carriers for your homeowners insurance coverage from one carrier to another is fairly seamless and can be handled by your local agent . Depending on the carrier they may require a payment on the new policy to get things started . Your current carrier should refund any unused portion of premium . Your mortgage lender may change your escrow amount based on the new premium and the timing of the start of the new policy in comparison to the homeowners insurance renewal date .
You can switch your car insurance at any time , but some times are better than others . If you have had an accident that is your fault , when you switch carriers after that , you may be paying a higher rate because of the claim . If you happen to be insured by a company that offers Accident Foregiveness , then you will find that when your policy renews , the premium wll not increase due to that accident .
Switching homeowner 's insurance is relatively easy to do and most times , you can change at a date that is suitable to you . The biggestconcernis whether the new company will accept your application . Assuming you have few or no claims , and meet their underwriting guidelines , you should be able to switch . Just as importantly is the issue of whether it is a good idea to change . As an independentbroker , that 's part of our job is todetermineif making a change makes good financial sense for you . If not , you should stay put .
Some companies offer persons with life insurance that has been rated Standard or better , the chance to switch their Term life insurance to that company without any health requirements . Otherwise , switching coverage usually involves applying for a new policy . This can be a good thing if your original policy was overpriced , or you lost weight or quit smoking or something that would reduce the rate on a new policy , or if you wanted to lock the premium in for a longer time than your current policy did . If your current policy is a Whole or Universal Life policy , you need to contact an agent to find what would be lost by switching , or what other options exist that may be more favorable to you .
You can change your Homeowners ' Insurance at any time , but for the most part , the switch can be a bit less complicated at the policy 's anniversary date rather than mid-term . That having been said , if you decide you have a need to change at any time , talk to your Insurance Professional who will be able to help make it as easy and beneficial to you as possible .
You can switch Medigap policies at any time , but it is important to understand potential obstacles . If you are outside of your Medigap open enrollment period -LRB- the 6-month period that begins on the first day of the month in which you 're 65 or older and enrolled in Part B -RRB- , then you will likely have to go through health underwriting to switch to a new plan or insurance company . Some companies do allow you to change your Medigap Plan if you remain with them , e.g. going from a Plan F to a Plan G , without new health underwriting ; but if you change insurance companies you will have to answer all health questions on the application . A new insurance company may deny you coverage based upon evaluation of your current health , so you may not be able to switch your Medigap policy to a new company . It is important to work with a licensed and experienced agent who can place you with a reputable company for the long term when you are in your Medigap open enrollment period .
If you are new to Medicare you can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan three months before - the month of - or 3 months after you turn 65 or qualify for Medicare . Otherwise you can only switch during the annual Open Enrollment Period from October 7th thru December 15th . If you have both Medicaid and Medicare or you are getting Extra Help thru Low Income Subsidy you can switch any time .
Most people consider it to be a Fixed Annuity that has a level guaranteed interest rate over the entire surrender charge period . Some Fixed Annuities have a guaranteed rate for part of the surrender period , and then switch to what they call a `` current '' rate . The `` Current Rate '' can vary with market conditions . Most Annuities that are considered `` cd type '' Annuities , have a guaranteed rate during the surrender period . Then it switches to the current rate once there are no more surrender charges . But at this time , if the owner does not like the current rate , they are free to switch to a different product with no surrender charges/fees .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Can Roth IRA Be Used As Collateral ?
I have not heard of a ROTH IRA being used as Collateral however , I suppose you might be able to put together a `` collateral assignment '' which means upon death , the unpaid collateral will be taken out of the value the ROTH is as the time of death with the remaining balance going to your heirs . I would have to do more research to be sure this would hold up as a contract however . You might be better off getting a small life insurance policy to cover that debt if that is indeed what you are covering .
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
There are three important considerations to make . Some employers match contributions to a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan which would greatly increase the benefit of contributions to a company sponsored 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- Nothing beats free money . The Roth IRA is not available to everyone . According to the Internal Revenue Service in 2014 , anyone contributing to a Roth IRA is phased out when their income exceeds $ 60,000-70 ,000 and they are single or the head of the household . The same rule applies if they are married and filing jointly if their combined incomes exceed $ 181,000-191 ,000 . If they are married and filing jointly they are phased out if their income is $ 0-10 ,000 . The point is , not everyone can contribute to a Roth IRA . When money will be taxed becomes the last major consideration . Because contributions are made with money that has already been taxed it is wise to make sure that it will be withdrawn when the marginal tax rate will be higher . This can not be determined with complete accuracy because tax policy changes from time to time , however , many working people are in a very low marginal tax bracket . These tax payers often are taking deductions for children , mortgage and a variety of other reasons . More mature tax payers dont always have those deductions available . Qualified distributions from a Roth IRA are not includable in gross income . Even the earnings are tax-free . In a traditional IRA they are tax-deferred . A qualified distribution can be made after the plan has been in effect five years beginning with the first taxable year for which the individual made a contribution to a Roth IRA and the distribution meets the following requirements : 1 . It is made on or after the date on which the individual attains the age of 59.5 . 2 . It is made to a beneficiary -LRB- or to the estate of the individual -RRB- or after the death of the individual 3 . It is attributable to the individuals being disabled -LRB- see IRC Section 72 -LRB- m -RRB- -LRB- 7 -RRB- 4 . It is a qualified first-time homebuyer distribution -LRB- subject to IRC rules . -RRB- It would appear that younger tax payers in low tax brackets should consider putting money into a Roth IRA . Because retirement seems to be a distant dream many young people are reluctant to start a Roth IRA , however , there is great wisdom in doing so . These younger tax payers are also more likely to have incomes that are below the limits mentioned previously . A distribution of a regular IRA is subject to taxation as ordinary income and may be subject to penalty tax if the distribution doesnt meet specified criteria . A distribution from a Roth IRA is considered a return of premium and not subject to income tax . Income taxation only becomes an issue if the amount returned exceeds that which was deposited . If specified criteria are met , even the growth or interest in the Roth IRA is also free of income tax . Distributions from most retirement plans are taxed as ordinary income . It is very helpful to have a source of tax free distributions . This is the role that the Roth IRA can play . A Roth IRA can accept rollovers from other qualified plans . In these events immediate income tax must be paid on the amount being transferred to the Roth IRA . The money is treated as ordinary income at the time of the rollover . These provisions may provide significant opportunities for retirement income planning . Most people start to consider the Roth IRA when they reach age 45 . They realize then that they will want the tax free benefit of the distribution . While it is never too late to start it would be to the interest of most tax payers to start earlier .
Most students start college with little financial preparation . Sometimes parents who have particular objectives will start saving money for their childrens college education , however , that is not common . The result is that college is now one of the top three lifetime expenses for families that send their children to college . There have been several plans advanced to help families accumulate money to send their children to college . You are probably aware of them . The greatest weakness of these plans is that the money is set aside for an individual student . While there may be an opportunity to name another student there isnt a clean way to recover the money without additional taxes and penalties . A Roth IRA has some income restrictions that might make it unavailable . However , it is a simple plan . Contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax money . There isnt an age limit on who can participate . Even if you already have an employer sponsored you can participate in a Roth IRA . If there is a non-working spouse an IRA can be started on his or her account . As I mentioned before there are some income restrictions based upon gross income level . Once the account has been in force for five years the funds can be withdrawn . These funds can be received free of income tax after age 59 and a half . You can pass the Roth IRA tax free to heirs if you have had the account for more than five years . If you use the account to fund college expenses you can withdraw the funds without paying the 10 % early distribution penalty tax . The money that you withdraw from the Roth IRA is free of income tax as long as it is less than the amount that you contributed . Because of the age restrictions a Roth IRA would be particularly attractive to a grandparent trying to accumulate money for a grandchild . A Roth IRA is best started as early as possible . Most people are in a lower tax bracket in their early years and that amplifies the effectiveness of the Roth IRA . Establishing a systematic deposit plan can be quite effective in accumulating money . If the student receives money from a parent or from their own Roth IRA it must be noted on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid -LRB- FAFSA . -RRB- The receipt of money from a Roth IRA can reduce the students eligibility for other forms of student aid . Incidentally , money coming from grandparents is not monitored . An alternative to a Roth IRA might be permanent life insurance . It has many of the same tax characteristics and has the unique feature of plan completion if the person insured dies . Permanent life insurance is also treated differently by the FAFSA . You could check with a college finance officer about that aspect . The advantage of using either a Roth IRA or permanent life insurance is that it gives your flexibility . If the child decides that they want to run away and join the circus instead of attending your alma mater , you still have the money and in the case of life insurance , the policy might serve other purposes .
I have not heard of a ROTH IRA being used as Collateral however , I suppose you might be able to put together a `` collateral assignment '' which means upon death , the unpaid collateral will be taken out of the value the ROTH is as the time of death with the remaining balance going to your heirs . I would have to do more research to be sure this would hold up as a contract however . You might be better off getting a small life insurance policy to cover that debt if that is indeed what you are covering .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and a Roth IRA are two very different retirement plans . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a plan that is established and administered by your employer . The rules for the plan are detailed in a plan document available from your employer . These plans are individualized and may include participation by your employer . Money contributed to your plan by your employer is free money . Free money is the very best kind of money . As a rule of thumb you should consider participating in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan up to the limit that the employer will match . Your contribution and your employers contribution flow into the plan before taxes . That means that the amount you contribute comes out of your paycheck before you get it . As a result there arent any taxes on that portion that goes into the plan . In order to put $ 100 into a plan it might take only $ 75 in reduced income because of the taxes . That is an example , not even a projection . The Roth IRA is an individual plan . You establish a Roth IRA on your own . The money you contribute to the Roth IRA is not deducted from your paycheck and is not deductible from your income tax . The rules for the Roth IRA are in the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The money in both the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and the Roth IRA will accumulate and earn free of current income tax . This is a tremendous advantage and should be strongly considered . There is a tax penalty for withdrawing the money prior to age 50.5 years . The Roth IRA might escape the penalty , but the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- will not . When money is withdrawn from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the distribution will be taxed as ordinary income . This money has not been taxed previously . It will all be taxed upon distribution . In addition when you reach age 70.5 the government will require minimum distributions each year that force the money in the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to be taken as ordinary income . Money can be withdrawn from a Roth IRA free of income tax so long as a couple of conditions are met . The Roth IRA is not subject to the minimum required distributions and may be passed to heirs free of income tax . There are rules involved but careful planning can generally avoid income tax altogether on distributed funds . As you can see these plans are different and yet you might want to have both . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- contributions can be much greater than the Roth IRA . There are also limits on participating in a Roth IRA . Having both tax deferred and tax-free income can give you great flexibility in retirement .
The similarity between a Roth IRA and a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan is that they are both qualified retirement plans . The Internal Revenue Service has issued regulations on both and they appear in the Code . The number 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is the code section that permits that specific type of retirement program . In both programs the income tax on earnings from money held in the program is tax-deferred , meaning that there isnt any income tax on the earnings in the current year . A Roth IRA is an individual plan . You own the plan . The money that you put into the plan is made with money that has already been taxed . You dont need to be the employee of a particular company to have a Roth IRA . There isnt any tax current tax deduction for the deposit . You can have a Roth IRA even if you have a retirement plan elsewhere . As a plan owner you select where the funds are to be invested , within limits . There are adjusted gross income limits to participation so check with your advisor if you have relatively high income . A non-working spouse can have a Roth IRA . A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an employer sponsored plan . Your employer sets up the plan and either administers the plan directly or uses a third party administrator to maintain the plan . Under most circumstances the employer states clearly who can participate in the plan . The money contributed to the plan is normally deducted from your paycheck before income tax is withheld . That is because that money is tax-deferred . There wont be any current income tax on that money . Sometimes employers will match some of the money contributed as an incentive . Particularly when the employer contributes to the plan there will probably be a vesting schedule . That means that the money contributed by the employer isnt really yours until you meet a certain criteria for service or participation in the plan . The plan will also stipulate whether in-service withdrawals can be made , and the conditions under which they can be made . During the accumulation phase withdrawals from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan can trigger a taxable event . However , with a Roth IRA if the program has been in place for more than five years and you are older than 59.5 , or have become disabled or need the money for a first-time home purchase , there isnt a penalty tax of 10 % . You can also use the money for higher education costs . Withdrawals for education prior to your reaching age 59.5 will be subject to income tax even though they are not subject to the additional 10 % penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 % penalty tax . Treatment can be different under a 401 -LRB- k. -RRB- The plan itself might not allow in-service withdrawals and income tax and penalty could also be charged . During the accumulation phase the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will offer a limited number of investment options , often including an option to purchase company stock . Those are the only investment options available . However , a Roth IRA can be funded with a variety of investments and changed whenever it is deemed best by you . When you retire with a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the IRS will require that starting after you reach 70.5 you must make withdrawals every year . These are scheduled in the code . With a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- these withdrawals are treated as ordinary income and are fully taxed . This is not a requirement of your Roth IRA . Withdrawals are not required and when you decide to take them , they are free of income tax if you are over 59.5 years old . You can name a beneficiary with both types of plans ; however with the Roth IRA if the plan has been held for more than five years , the funds can pass to an heir tax-free . The key issue is that deposits in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- are currently not included in your income tax and may be matched by your employer . The contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax dollars . When you retire all of the money in your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan will be taxed as withdrawn as ordinary income , however , none of the money from a Roth IRA will be taxed .
A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Heres how the Traditional IRA works : You must be under age 70 to contribute No maximum income restriction on eligibility to contribute Earned income must be greater than your annual Traditional IRA contributions Tax deferred growth Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- Your deduction may be limited if you or your spouse are covered by a retirement plan at work and your income exceeds certain levels Required Minimum Distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- must start by April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which you reach age 70 An advantage of Roth IRAs is the tax free distribution during retirement . One of the selling points of a Traditional IRA has been you defer the taxes . However , an often overlooked important detail is that in addition to deferring the taxes , you also defer the tax calculation . Who really knows what your specific tax rate will be during retirement ? You will likely not have the same deductions you had when you contributed to an IRA such as dependents and a mortgage . Then there is the general question of do you think taxes are going up or down in the future ? There could be a great advantage to having a Roth IRA if you can handle paying the taxes on the money upfront when you put it into the Roth account . Theres something about the comfort of a stream of retirement income that is tax free that makes it very attractive . Based on the small number of companies that offer pension plans , people largely find themselves on their own when it comes to preparing for retirement . Both the Traditional IRA and the Roth IRA can be helpful retirement income vehicles . As always , you need to consult with a qualified financial person that can make sure your individual situation and needs are taken into consideration when determining which is most appropriate for you .
The Roth IRA is a retirement savings vehicle . Choosing a Roth IRA over a traditional IRA gives you several clear advantages : 1 -RRB- Your Roth IRA grows tax free . 2 -RRB- During your retirement years you draw tax free income from your Roth IRA account . 3 -RRB- Because you 've already paid taxes on your Roth IRA , it hedges against the possibility of having a tax rate increase , thus causing more taxes to be taken out of your Roth IRA income stream during retirement . Remember , you will most likely have less write-offs when you retire . In retirement , you will have no dependents and could have your mortgage paid off . 4 -RRB- No required minimum distributions -LRB- RMDs -RRB- when you reach 701/2 . In retirement , you 'll thank yourself for having the foresight of a tax free income stream while your neighbors face the likelihood of an increased tax bite from their save traditional IRA .
The Roth IRA provides an ideal solution to many peoples retirement planning needs . Contributions are made with after tax dollars but taxation on the earnings is deferred and then forgiven upon reaching the age of 50 and a half . The plan must have been in effect for five years . These tax free dollars give the retiree tremendous leverage and flexibility . The Roth IRA is an essential part of many peoples plans . There are income restrictions that disqualify individuals and married couples filing jointly from establishing a retirement program using a Roth IRA . There is a phased out eligibility for Singles or heads of households earning between $ 60-70 ,000 annually or married couples filing jointly of $ 96,000-116 ,000 . and there are other restrictions . If a person is facing these restrictions and can not contribute to a Roth IRA there are several steps that can be taken . The first is to contact the plan administrator at their place of employment . It is a fairly simple matter to add a Roth option to existing 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . These Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans have all the benefit of a Roth IRA and the limits for participation are much higher making them ideal , particularly for highly compensated employees . The key is to determine if the persons future income tax rate will exceed the rate that is currently being charged . Many are surprised to find that when they stop paying on a mortgage and other deductible expenses that their income in retirement can be in a higher tax bracket than their current bracket . If there is not an option for a Roth 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plan an alternative would be permanent life insurance . It is taxed in a similar way to the Roth IRA . The deposits are made with after tax dollars and the distribution can be free of income tax with some careful planning . The life insurance has the additional benefit of being self-completing should death interrupt the accumulation phase . Permanent life insurance comes in several styles which will match the investment options normally available to those who are interested in a Roth IRA . For the more conservative there is the totally guaranteed funding available in whole life insurance . The insurance company assumes all of the risk and steady growth is guaranteed . For the more adventuresome there are life policies in which the cash value is invested in a separate fund . This is normally administered by the insurance company but may have a better yield that the funds held in the companys general fund . There is another form where the detached cash value earns interest based upon one of several popular market indexes . These indexed universal life policies allow you to experience some of the gains of the market while often limiting the downside of the market . For those who want to experience the fluctuations and opportunities of the market there are variable life policies where the cash value is fully invested at the discretion of the policyholder . These policies have greater risk and potential rewards .
Yes , it is possible to have a 401k and a Roth IRA at the same time . They are completely separate accounts . If you are contributing to your 401k at work -LRB- and hopefully there is a company `` match '' as well -RRB- , you can also contribute to your own Roth IRA outside of work . When it comes time to start drawing on these two different retirement funds , the money taken out of your 401k will be taxable at that years ' ordinary income tax level . You will be assessed a 10 % early withdrawal penalty if you do not wait until age 591/2 to begin your withdrawals . There are a handful of exceptions that can allow you to begin withdrawals from your 401k prior to age 591/2 . Beginning April 1 of the year following the year in which you turn age 701/2 , you are required to begin Required Minimum Withdrawals from your 401k . Talk to your CPA about how this is calculated . Roth IRA 's require that you or your spouse have earned income and your adjusted gross income can not exceed certain levels . The contributions you made to your Roth IRA can be withdrawn at any time , tax free because you have already paid tax on this money . However , in order to withdraw your earnings from your Roth IRA account tax and penalty free , you must be at least 591/2 years old and the contributions to your Roth IRA must have been made at least 5 years before the withdrawal date . If you withdraw your Roth IRA earnings earlier than 5 years after the contributions , the earnings would not be considered a qualified distribution . The calculation on the `` 5 years '' is not quite as straight forward as you would think looking at a calendar and you should discuss this withdrawal with a qualified financial professional .
A Roth IRA isnt better . A Roth IRA is different . Contributions for a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- reduce your current income tax . Contributions to a Roth IRA do not . Distributions from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are fully taxable as ordinary income . Distributions from a Roth IRA are not taxable at all . The limits to how much you can put into a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- are quite generous . The limits to contributions to a Roth IRA are restrictive . There are taxes and possible penalties if you withdraw money from a 401 -LRB- K -RRB- prior to age 59.5 . You can withdraw from the capital invested from a Roth IRA without tax consequences . There are advantages to both .
A Roth IRA is not related to etrade in any direct way unless you simply have your Roth IRA as part of your etrade account . Let 's look at the basic definitions . A Roth IRA is an Individual Retirement Arrangement -LRB- see IRS Publication 590 -RRB- that is generally not taxed if you meet certain conditions . Your Roth IRA can contain a wide variety of financial products including stocks , bonds , mutual funds , CDs , annuities and much more . Etrade is generally considered an online discount stock brokerage service for self-directed investors . You can open a Roth IRA at thousands of institutions . One of those financial institutions is etrade . Whether that would be `` good '' is largely dependent on you and your choices of how you invest your Roth IRA funds .
Qualified funds are funds that get special tax treatment through some particular provisions of the IRS code . IRA 's , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- 's and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- 's are all examples of qualified plans . It sounds like you have been making these contributions directly -LRB- ie : not through payroll deduction -RRB- , so your Variable Annuity is most likely an IRA . If that is the case it could be either a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . The tax ramifications of your withdrawal will be different depending which type of IRA it is . As always , you should consult with your tax adviser before making any decisions . If you have a traditional IRA you most likely took a deduction on your tax return each year for your $ 1,200 contribution . If that is the case , the full amount of any withdrawal will be taxable . In addition you will pay a 10 % early withdrawal penalty since you are not 591/2 . If you have a Roth IRA you did not get a deduction on your tax return for your contributions . With a Roth IRA you can withdraw the total of your contributions without taxes or penalty . Any earnings that you withdraw will be subject to taxes and a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . If it is a Roth IRA you may want to consider withdrawing your contributions only . You can then leave the earnings in the account until you are 591/2 at which time they can be withdrawn tax free . I would reinforce that some seemingly minor details can have a significant impact on the effect of the withdrawal on your taxes . Please talk with your tax adviser before finalizing your decision as to what to do .
Anyone who wishes to save money for retirement should consider a Roth IRA . This is particularly true if you are currently in a rather low income tax bracket . The key is that the deposits are made with after tax dollars and the money withdrawn is not taxed at all , unless it is withdrawn before age 59 and a half . Many people will not move to a lower income tax bracket when they retire and a Roth IRA is ideal for that situation . There are other advantages to a Roth IRA . To find out if you should by a Roth IRA , just take a picture of yourself and go to the internet where you can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When you have that picture , ask the picture if you should buy a Roth IRA . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement because you might spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is the best place to save money regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the amount required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . This is where you need to make a decision about a Roth IRA . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That is still burned in many peoples memory . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
There are several rules that determine your eligibility to open a Roth IRA . 1 -RRB- You must first have an income . Did you have earned income in the current tax year ? 2 -RRB- If you earned income , did your income exceed the limits set by the federal government ? This income limit changes every year and is depends on your marital status and tax filing status to determine the maximum income . You qualify for a Roth IRA based upon your Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You can not contribute more into a Roth IRA than you earned in income . For example , if you earned $ 5,000 for 2014 , that is your maximum contribution . 4 -RRB- The contribution limit in 2014 was $ 5,500 maximum . 5 -RRB- There is no maximum age where you are limited or prohibited from making a contribution to a Roth IRA . 6 -RRB- You are not required to take a mandatory distribution at age 70.5 like qualified IRA 's . 7 -RRB- You can contribute to a Roth IRA even if you participate in a retirement plan at work . Depending on circumstances there may be other rules but this gives you a few ideas .
Yes , you can have a Roth IRA and a 401k . Your employer needs to offer a 401k plan . Having both a Roth IRA and 401k can be a great strategy for increasing your retirement income . If your employer is providing a match for your 401k , that 's even better . A Roth IRA -LRB- Individual Retirement Arrangement -RRB- is a retirement plan that is generally not taxed provided certain conditions are met . If you satisfy the requirements , qualified distributions are tax free . Here are the basic rules of a Roth IRA : No age restrictions for contribution or distribution Maximum income allowed for 2014 to participate is $ 129,000 single and the head of household , $ 191,000 joint filers Earned income must be or greater than your Roth IRA contributions Tax free growth you pay no taxes when you make qualified withdrawals after age 59 and your account has been open at least five years Maximum contribution $ 5500 -LRB- $ 6500 if you are 50 or older -RRB- You should consult with a qualified financial professional when considering financial products and strategies for retirement income .
If you have a traditional IRA , anyone can convert to a Roth IRA . He is the rub however , because the traditional IRA is tax-deferred and the ROTH IRA is pre-taxed , you will have to pay taxes on the amount you with to convert to the Roth . There may be strategies available which can help you to pay for that tax , through bonus which may be received on certain Fixed Indexed Annuities . If you are considering Converting a traditional IRA into a Roth , I recommend you call your adviser or reach out to me .
Individual retirement accounts -LRB- IRA -RRB- are allowed under the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The primary difference between a Roth IRA and a regular IRA is when money is taxed . Deposits in a regular IRA are deductible from current income tax ; deposits to a Roth IRA are not . In both cases the interest earned on the accounts is not currently taxable . When all the necessary conditions are met , withdrawals from a regular IRA are taxed as earned income in the year received . Withdrawals from the Roth IRA are free of any income tax . There are other differences that affect estate planning and required distributions .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Are Life Insurance Dividends Taxed ?
Great question ! The IRS considers dividends paid to you to be an overpayment of premiums , and as such , are n't taxed . You paid taxes on the money for the premiums that you paid , so basically you were just `` over paying '' . That said , there can be situations where you would have to pay taxes if you take out loans and your policy lapses , but as long as it stays within the policy , you are fine . need more detail ? feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Dividends in life insurance policies are , by definition , a return of your money and are therefore not taxed -LRB- the money you used to pay the premiums were already after-tax monies -RRB- . The dividends can be used in several ways -LRB- the most common that carriers offer are reducing premiums , securing paid-up additions , or receiving the monies directly as payments -RRB- .
In Canada , life insurance dividends are not taxed as paid up additions while they are attached to the policy . If they are dividends on deposit the interest on the dividends is taxable . On surrender or withdrawal the dividends form part of the cash value and will be taxed on the gain . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Whole Life -LRB- AKA , Ordinary Life -RRB- is more expensive because the insurance company is accepting a higher risk to provide the guarantees of contract . There are primarily two types of whole life contracts that guarantee both the face amount -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to the beneficiary and the internal tax-favored build up of cash values . Participating whole life offers the insured the opportunity to `` participate '' in the financial success of the underwriting carrier by providing the possibility of receiving a dividend at the end of each policy year . Dividends are not guaranteed and while they are presented as a percent -LRB- example : 5.2 % credited dividend rate -RRB- , they are not the same as simple interest . It involves a formula that takes into account the cash values in the in force policy along with the investment returns and claims experience of the insurance company in any given year . The policy owner can direct the company to use the dividend in any one of four to six ways , depending on the carrier . All but one of those options will not produce an incometax event . -LRB- Taking the dividend as cash , however , will . -RRB- Most whole life policyowners either choose to have the dividend purchase paid up additions of insurance -LRB- increasing the death benefit as well as the cash value of the policy -RRB- or to reduce premium with excess to purchase paid up additions . Non-participating whole life or interest-sensitive whole life does not pay a dividend . But , it most likely does provide some level of a guaranteed death benefit and guaranteed cash values . Some whole life policies now provide the opportunity to over-pay the guaranteed level premium for a period of time to turbo-charge the growth of the cash value which grows tax-deferred . This requires the addition of a paid-up additions rider -LRB- PUAR -RRB- and there are limitations on how much over-payment one can make . This capability has been touted by some financial planners as a way of being your own bank because access to and repayment of cash value loans are tax-favored . One avoids a lengthy wait for approval that a bank would need to approve a loan , as well . -LRB- Go to Amazon.com and search `` be your own bank '' for more details . -RRB- In the current unstable economic environment we are in , whole life hasexperienced a comeback in sales due to the safety and security of this type of insurance contract with tax-deferred inside build up of cash values producing rates of return higher than other fixed interest financial vehicles . However , some analysts minimizethose perceived advantages because historically market returns exceed cash value build up , and there can be dire consequences to the policy if cash values are not managed prudently . Reckless use of taking loans can result in the death benefit being greatly reduced or cause the policy to lapse with little or no value . Whole life is not suitable in all circumstances calling for the application of a life insurance policy . Those seeking direction and guidance should consult with an experienced insurance professional or knowledgeable Certified Financial Planner or other advising professional before purchasing any life insurance contract .
By IRS definition Life Insurance Dividends are considered a return of `` unused premium '' and not subject to income tax as they have already been taxed going in as premium . Mutual companies pay dividends to policyholders as they have no stockholders as owners of the company . The permanent policyholders -LRB- not term , not universal life policyholders -RRB- are considered the owners of the company and dividends are applied to their whole life policies . A dividend for a mutual life insurance company is a combination of investment return , positive mortality experience -LRB- fewer deaths than expected -RRB- and operating expense savings and what is held as surplus by the company . Money beyond what the company needs or projects is returned to whole life policyholders in that form of a dividend . The surplus is what protects the company if for some reason they goof . Most mutual companies have been paying dividends consistently for more than a century .
This is a great question and I appreciate the opportunity to offer some answers ! Whole Life Insurance has a lot of benefits ! For one it is highly customizable in the way it may be funded . It can be set up to be funded in as little as 11 annual payments , or paid for monthly over the life of the insured up to age 100 . Whole Life policies have a Guaranteed cash accumulation feature where a guaranteed interest is paid into a cash value portion of the policy , which then becomes a liquid asset accessible at the will of the owner of the policy . The interest -LRB- as well as dividends in participating policies -RRB- is paid into the cash value Tax-FREE . And a policy may be `` over-funded '' up to about 300 % , which of course will increase the tax-free interest growth rate . In a participating policy where dividends are paid in , the dividends may be used to purchase additional insurance . This increases not only the death benefit without ever taking another medical exam or even answering questions , but also increases the dividends paid ! Whole life insurance does not expire . It remains in force -LRB- as long as the premiums are paid up -RRB- until the insured dies , the owner decides to surrender the policy -LRB- for the cash value -RRB- , or the insured reaches the age of endowment . The age of endowment varies with the policy , but may be age 95 , 99 , 100 , or now days may be as high as age 121 . When that happens the entire value of the policy is handed over to the owner of the policy . Income tax free . When paid , the death benefit passes to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- income tax free . Another option available with Whole Life Insurance is the ability to use the cash value and then to take loans from the policy death benefit to supplement retirement income ! This can be set up to be paid out monthly , quarterly or annually ... and these payments are , again , Tax-free ! So to sum up , Whole Life Insurance does not expire regardless of the possible declining health of the insured and provides a death benefit to beneficiaries that is transferred tax-free . Whole Life grows Cash Value , Tax-Free , which is a liquid asset that may be used for any purpose the owner wishes , and may be accessed without incurring a taxable event by means of a policy loan . With participating policies the cash value can increase by means of guaranteed interest and dividends , which may be used to buy additional insurance with no medical requirements . The premiums are set at the beginning of the policy and are guaranteed not to increase for any reason . And the entire premium may be paid in as little as 11 annual payments , spread out over the lifetime of the insured , or set up to be paid over a 15 , 20 or 30 year period determined by the the owner of the policy . And Whole Life Insurance may be used to supplement retirement income as a tax-free cash stream .
Permanent life insurance , such as whole life and universal life are comprised of two parts . One part is the pure insurance , or death benefit . The other part is the cash or accumulation account . When you pay your premiums , part of your premium goes to pay for the death benefit , the internal cost of insurance . The remainder is credited to the cash or accumulation account -LRB- minus a small expense deduction -RRB- . This account grows by additions from the insurance company in the form of interest or dividends . Universal life policies earn interest while whole life policies are paid dividends . This interest or dividend is dependent on the performance of the insurance company 's investments and can change year to year . Just like any other accumulation account , the larger the amount the faster it grows . So , at the beginning of the policy it grows rather slowly and , as the account receives more deposits it , grows more quickly . With life insurance , you wo n't receive a 1099 at the end of the year . The tax is deferred until you withdraw it . Then , the withdrawals are considered paid premiums first , until you 've withdrawn as much as you 've paid in . Only after that will withdrawals be taxed at your current income tax rate . This tax deferral is one of the great things about life insurance . You also have the ability to take a loan against the cash value in your life insurance , usually at a very low rate and this does not trigger income tax . Lastly , for a long term need , permanent insurance is the least expensive way to purchase life insurance . Over time , the cash value will grow and will eventually be more than what you 've paid making it essentially free , or better . If this interests you , find a good agent you can trust and he/she will help you put together the right plan for you and your family .
A participating whole life insurance policy has the potential to generate an annual dividend . It can also have the potential to generate a terminal dividend at the surrender of the policy . Dividends are not guaranteed . A dividend is the return of unused premium to the policy owner . Because dividends are considered return of unused premiums , they are not taxed up to basis . Dividends can be taken in cash and used in a verity of internal policy rider applications : term insurance paid up additional insurance , to reduce premiums , to pay premiums , etc. .
Life insurance dividend options tell the insurance company what you want to do with the dividend that is paid on a participating policy . Options depend on the company , but the most common options are : - Paid-up additions - where divididends are used to purchase paid up additions - Accumulate at interest - dividends are placed into an account at the insurance company and they earn a specificed interest rate set by the company - Reduce premium - dividends are used to pay down the premium or cover the entire premium due if the dividend is large enough to cover the premium - Purchase one year term insurance - the dividend purchases term insurance to increase total death benefit - Cash - the policy holder is simply paid the dividend as a check
Participating whole life accumulates cash values . The question has aninherent policyprovision that may have tax ramifications , the word `` withdrawal . '' Withdrawalgenerallyrefers to accessing basis . Participatingwhole life distributes dividends . Dividends are a return of unused premium . Withdrawing your dividends up to basis should be tax free and with no policy charges . If you need to accesscashvalues beyond basis , you need to takeinterestchargingpolicy loans , which are tax free , as long as the policy is kept in force for the life of the insured , Thepolicyloans onparticipatingwhole life insurance are spread loans or direct recognition loans . Consult your tax adviser and insurance professional before moving forward with withdrawals .
There are three different types of companies that sell life insurance . Stock companies , which pay profits to stockholder aft expenses , fraternal 's that have a common membership and profits are used to provide extra benefits for the members , and mutual companies that pay excess profits back to the policy holder in the form of dividends . Dividends then are the excess profit a mutual company pays . You will have three options with a company that pays dividends : You can leave them to accumulate interest , but you may have to pay tax on the interest , you can allow them to buy additional paid up insurance , this is the one I usually recommend . This helps increase your death benefit thus allowing for inflation . The third option is using them to reduce premium , thus in some case depending on the dividends paid the dividends will eventually be making your premium payments for you . Dividends are not guaranteed .
In Canada , life insurance dividends are not taxed as paid up additions while they are attached to the policy . If they are dividends on deposit the interest on the dividends is taxable . On surrender or withdrawal the dividends form part of the cash value and will be taxed on the gain . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Any life insurance policy that is participating can pay dividends . The most ubiquitous type of life insurance to pay dividends is whole life insurance , but it is not the only type f life insurance that can be participating -LRB- pays dividends -RRB- . It 's important to note that just because a policy is participating , there is no guarantee that it will pay dividends in any given year . Dividends are paid as a result of surplus -LRB- excess earnings -RRB- with the insurer on the product issued .
What is the best type of life insurance to purchase ? The answer depends on what you want the insurance for and for how long the coverage is needed . Life insurance basically creates cash at death which can be used to create or conserve wealth . There are additional features available depending on the type of plan and how you are planning to use it in your overall financial planning . Here are the main types of life insurance and some factors to consider : Term life insurance As the name implies , coverage is for a specified term : 5 , 10 , 20 , 30 years , etcetera . At the end of the term the term the policy renews at a higher premium . Factors to consider include : how long you need the coverage for , the rate at renewal and if you will need to convert to permanent insurance . Whole life insurance With whole your coverage is for your whole life . The factors to consider include whether the policy is participating and is eligible for dividends or non-participating . In addition the policy guarantees such as premium and cash value . The company financials and dividend history are important considerations especially when considering a participating whole life policy . Universal life insurance Coverage for your whole life if properly managed . This type of coverage offers more flexibility in premium level , insurance cost and investment options . These are all factors to consider . Working with an independent insurance broker , who understands your needs , will help you decide on the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Paying life insurance dividends can be paid on any type of policy from any participating life insurance carrier . The most common companies that pay dividends are called mutual insurance companies . Some of the more common names of mutual insurance companies are State Farm , NY Life and Northwestern Mutual . Mutual insurance companies consider the policyholders part owners of the company and share a portion of the profits as dividends . You may or may not receive a benefit based on the year 's profits . You may find mutual company premiums a bit more expensive than none mutual companies with an expectation of paying their dividends . When purchasing a life insurance policy you should find the best product at the best price to cover your unique situation , not on who pays a dividend or not .
Mutual funds distributions are different from the dividends paid by stocks . Stock dividends are usually a distribution of profits . Most mutual funds are set up as trusts and pay tax at the highest rate on any gains -LRB- interest , dividends , capital gains -RRB- that are held in the mutual fund . In order to avoid paying tax at the highest rate the mutual find flows through the gains to unit holders . Some mutual funds also distribute a portion of the original capital . Consequently , the distribution paid by a mutual fund does not simple reflect the dividends paid by the stocks held by the mutual fund . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
What are life insurance dividends ? Dividends are a part of working with a mutual life company and by IRS code are considered a return of overpaid premium to the policy holder and are not taxed as income . The dividends are made up of savings from operations overhead , a surplus left from death benefit reserves and the company investment portfolio returns . Dividends are not guaranteed as all three of these main components can be projected , but not `` known '' in advance .
what is a life insurance dividend ? Dividends are paid out to whole life policy holders of mutual companies . Mutual companies are policyholder owned , there are no stockholders . Dividends by IRS explaination are a return of unused premium and not subject to income tax . A dividend is made up of three things , investement returns . savings from operating expenses and savings from unused funds set aside for death claims .
The price of whole life insurance isdependenton gender , age and health condition of the insured . The premium is paid for the life of the insured or the maturity date of the policy . The vast majority of whole life is participating or generates an annual dividend . A dividend is areturnof unused premium and interest credited to the policy . If the policy owner elects to use the dividend to pay premiums along the way , the overall price for the coverage is reduced . If the economic exposure is perpetual , apermanentpolicy is necessary , but not necessarily participating whole life insurance . Guaranteed universal life may be a better economic alternative . Todetermine how much whole life costs versus guaranteed universal life insurance simply email me your gender , age , smoking status and general health to obtain a estimation on the price tag .
Life insurance dividends are paid on par life insurance plans . Most par plans are some form of permanent life insurance but term policies can pay dividends as well . Dividends result from the insurance carrier `` overcharging '' you so any dividend is considered a return of premium and is normally not subject to taxation .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Who Should Get Variable Life Insurance ?
That is a great question ! Variable life insurance policies are a very different type of life insurance , andare definitely not for everyone . In a term or whole life policy , the cost of the insurance is built in to the premium price , and so the only way they would end prematurely is if you stopped making payments . In variable life policies , the cost of the insurance is paid , or not paid , by the performance of the stock market . Instead of the safety of a steady , known payment , a variable policy is tied to the stock market , and as it varies , so does the policy 's value , length of coverage , and your premium payment amount . This type of policy is best suited for someone with a high risk tolerance , who can afford to make larger payments if needed , and who is willing to monitor closely the policy 's value . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
A variable annuity is a tax-deferred retirement vehicle that allows the owner to choose from an offered selection of investments . When annuitized , it pays out a stream of income to the annuitant . The investments you choose for your variable annuity can increase or decrease in value and that means the overall value and your payout will follow . While a variable annuity can offer a nice upside , there is risk and if the investments inside the annuity decline in value , your payout will be decreased . A variable life insurance policy is a form of permanent life insurance offering a death benefit to your beneficiaries upon your passing . A portion of the premium you pay for a variable life insurance policy goes toward the insurance , a portion toward various investments that the owner of the policy chooses and a portion goes to cover associated fees related to the management of the investments . The variable life insurance policy owner will be given options for the investments , generally mutual funds . As the value of those mutual funds go up and down , the cash value inside your policy follows . There are many options to variable annuities and variable life insurance products that should be considered before purchasing .
How do you get out of a variable life ? Well first you should be very certain it 's the best thing for you , not something you 're being told by someone who wants to sell you a different product . Variable life policies simply require more attention than other policies because of the investment aspect . You 're in the stock market with a variable life and you can manage it , if you pay attention . If you just want out of the plan , you simply cancel in writing to the insurance company . They will send you any values -LRB- minus surrender charges , if any -RRB- left in the policy . While not a big fan of variable life , a person should really see if some changes to the policy fix the problem first .
Is variable universal life worth it ? It 's going to depend on the individual who purchases it . Variable Universal Life has many `` moving parts '' that require attention . This is not a purchase and put in the drawer policy . It requires `` management '' by the individual who purchases it . These policies may require rebalancing and/or changing funding options within the choices . Anyone who purchases a VUL should have a good understanding of investment risk and what it requires for the best possible outcome . For me personally , I am not a fan of VUL as I feel some things in a portfolio should be boring , safe and consistent and offer a reasonable return . I feel traditional old fashioned whole life offers that to an individual . It becomes a personal question of how much RISK a person should have . For me , my whole life respresents a boring financial product , one that did ` nt go backwards in 2008 , when all my exciting ones did . Personally , I want something that is steady , along with something else that has more risk but greater return possibilities . Again personally speaking , I do n't feel insurance should ever be an `` at risk '' product . Just me , old school , sorry .
A non-qualified variable annuity accumulates tax deferred with access to the market . High tax bracket individuals could benefit from the tax deferral aspects of variable annuities . A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Variable annuities have performance records and risk assessments published through Morning Star .
Product suitability is extremely important in selecting an investment , variable annuities are no exception . To determine if variable annuities are suitable , you need to establish a personal financial profile that includes your risk assessment , your effective tax bracket and your life expectancy . Generally , mid to long term investors with high effective tax brackets should consider tax deferred variable annuities . Keep in mind that the benefits of variable annuities come at a cost like all investments . So do the benefits outweigh the cost of tax deferred variable annuity ? There are so many tax deferred variable annuities to choose from and the selection process can be daunting .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
Universal Variable Life Insurance -LRB- or VUL - Variable Universal Life insurance -RRB- is a form of life insurance that has a death benefit and investment component . Agents who sell Variable Universal Life must have a securities license in addition to a life insurance license . The variable part of the title refers to the investment aspect ; the universal part of the title refers to the insurance aspect of this product .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
The suitability of an individual to purchase a variable annuity should be determined by the licensed variable annuity agent before the plan is proposed . Typically , the individual who purchases a variable annuity is one that wants a hands-on experience . While there are many risk factors to consider a desire to have money in specific investment groups would also be a reason to purchase a variable annuity .
Variable annuities may be appropriate for a high tax bracket long term investor with a desire for market returns with an understanding of the risk . A tax deferred variable annuity is a security and an insurance product . Because a variable annuity is a security , potential product purchasers need to determine their risk tolerance for market losses . High tax bracket , long term investors may also benefit from the tax deferral of variable annuities . A variable annuity has a general interest rate earning account and separate sub accounts using equity and bond investments . Policy expenses are deducted from premiums , i.e. net premiums . Net premiums are then invested in the either the general account or separate sub accounts or both . Net premiums invested in the allocations in the separate sub accounts that are either credited with gains or debited with losses depending on performance . Most variable annuities are purchased in a qualified or non-qualified plan for future income .
Variable life works very much like Universal life in concept , except that the accumulation account allows for different investment choices than just a fixed account . A variable life policy will offer different investment choices within the policy . Usually mutual funds are the type of investments used within the accumulation account . The insured selects from the choices offered by the policy . Usually there is something for just about every risk profile . The insured selects for example 3 funds to have the excess premium -LRB- beyond the current monthly charge for insurance and fees -RRB- deposited into . Over time these will gain and they will lose as any investment does . The idea is the same as any investment , to make money over time . A variable life is very much a hands on product . It should be reviewed and possibly rebalanced on a regular basis . Variable life policies are not ' `` fire and forget '' plans .
The variable annuity will make sense based on your individual needs and personal circumstances . This type of annuity is a contract between the insurance company and the insured -LRB- i.e. client or customer -RRB- . The insured pays one lump sum payment or may make other payment arrangements to the insurance company . Then , the insurance company agrees to make payments back to the insured at specific dates in the future . With the variable annuity , the client can receive monthly payments for the rest of his life . Also , this annuity protects you if you out live your assets . Variable annuities are also used to hedge against inflation . If you think you are going to live a long time , you should think about buying an annuity . Your beneficiary -LRB- i.e. children and other family members -RRB- may be able to receive the payments when you die . The variable annuity is tax-deferred . You do not pay taxes until you withdraw the money . Some variable annuities have a death benefit . Make sure you read the prospectus and ask a lot of questions . This type of investment is for the long-term and to help you meet your retirement goals and objectives .
There are many choices of life insurance available to you . The main stream life insurance products are term life , universal life , variable life and whole life . Each one has a specific purpose . Term life insurance is meant to coverage a specific period of time . The common terms are 1-5-10-15-20-25-30-35 years . This means the rate or premium you purchase is guaranteed level for that period of time regardless of change in health , life style or occupation . Term life is commonly used for younger people starting out in life , covering a large debt , life a mortgage on a home or business debt , or covering for a young child 's education . term life insurance allows for the largest face amount for the smallest premium payments . Universal life and variable life are permanent life insurance solutions that build cash value . Typically the premiums are more expensive and the face amounts are less because part of the premium is going into a cash value fund that can be invested with numerous options . The cash value can later be used for retirement , college funds , critical or chronic illness or even to purchase a large asset like a home . The universal and variable options are typically more aggressive with the cash value funds . The last option , whole life insurance , is very similar to the previous universal life insurance options . However , the cash value funds are typically a fixed percentage of growth . Whole life as it 's name suggests is primarily meant to cover you for your entire life . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker with numerous carriers to shop the market and find you the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
That is a great question ! Variable life insurance policies are a very different type of life insurance , andare definitely not for everyone . In a term or whole life policy , the cost of the insurance is built in to the premium price , and so the only way they would end prematurely is if you stopped making payments . In variable life policies , the cost of the insurance is paid , or not paid , by the performance of the stock market . Instead of the safety of a steady , known payment , a variable policy is tied to the stock market , and as it varies , so does the policy 's value , length of coverage , and your premium payment amount . This type of policy is best suited for someone with a high risk tolerance , who can afford to make larger payments if needed , and who is willing to monitor closely the policy 's value . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
There is no such thing as variable term life insurance . Variable life insurance has a cash value component , which Term does not . Variable life insurance can use the stock market to grow -LRB- or lose -RRB- cash value . Since Term Life Insurance does not have a cash value , the word variable can not apply to it , at least in the traditional sense .
It all depends on your risk tolerance and financial needs . Fixed annuities are well suited for a conservative retirement saver who wants guaranteed returns . Indexed Annuities are well suited for a conservative to semi-conservative retirement saver who wants guaranteed returns with the opportunity for a higher return than a fixed annuity . Variable Annuities are well suited for an investor who does not mind taking on the risk of loss . A person should carefully asses their risk tolerance and realistically how much loss they are willing to withstand before investing in a Variable Annuity . Annuities can be a great idea depending on your retirement savings needs .
It may not necessarily be the case that anyone needs a variable annuity . But variable annuities are well suited for people who are interested in taking on the additional risk available in the sub accounts available in a variable annuity , but also want the additional benefits afforded by a variable annuity . These benefits include return of premium and riders that can generate guaranteed lifetime income based on a certain account balance .
Discuss your situation with a licensed variable annuity agent . After an extensive series of questions the agent will develop a risk profile . Unless you are very conservative the agent can show you a variable annuity as a possible solution to your retirement plan . A variable annuity appeals to customers who want appreciation greater than that offered by a fixed annuity . There are other annuities that should also be considered .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Can I Get Disability Insurance If Already Pregnant ?
Can you get disability insurance if you are already pregnant ? Yes , but not for the pregnancy . It is possible to get disability insurance while pregnant , but disability insurance plans use a pre-existing condition clause in the policy to prevent a person from going on immediate claim when they purchase the policy .
Can you get disability insurance if you are already pregnant ? Yes , but not for the pregnancy . It is possible to get disability insurance while pregnant , but disability insurance plans use a pre-existing condition clause in the policy to prevent a person from going on immediate claim when they purchase the policy .
You can not get a short term disability policy that will pay for time off for a normal pregnancy and delivery , once you are already pregnant . If you got the short term disability insurance policy before becoming pregnant , they can receive benefits from that policy when you delivery your baby .
Unfortunately , you can not get disability insurance while you are already pregnant . The pregnancy would be considered a pre-existing condition , as it would be a certain reason for the disability policy to pay out . As soon as your baby is born , you can apply for either long or short term disability insurance .
Generally if your already pregnant the insurance company will make you wait until after the baby is born . No insurance company will insure someone knowing that there is a potential claim pending . Disability insurance does not fall under the Affordable Care Act guidelines for pre-existing conditions therefore there would be know coverage for your pregnancy .
Can you get disability insurance while pregnant ? Yes , you can . Will they cover the pregnancy and any complications with ? NOPE . Disability policies carry a pre-existing condition clause that allows them to turn down a claim for a condition that occurs prior to the application . So you could get a disability policy while pregnant , but everything connected to the pregnancy would not be covered .
The answer t your questions depends on a couple factors like location as insurance is sold sate by state . The easy answer is GROUP insurance . If you have insurance provided by your employer , you likely have maternity . Blue Cross has a maternity rider you can add at time of application . It is expensive and you have to have it several months before the pregnancy . The Affordable Care act fully implemented January 2014 includes maternity . If you are already pregnant , you OBGYN will work with you on payments . Should there be a medical emergency your insured wife will get the medical attention she needs as will the baby AND the mother your child is born he / she is covered on your existing plan . You have 30 days to inform your carrier so the new born can be added to the policy .
This is a very common question and the answer is that it depends on the carrier and its definition of total disability . Normal pregnancy is not considered a disability by some carriers . In fact , it is clearly excluded from coverage in the contract . For others , as long as it falls into their definition of what constitutes a total disability , they will replace income after the elimination period is satisfied . The definition of disability is key . A typical definitionmight be something like `` the inability to perform the usual and customary duties of the occupation -LRB- job -RRB- in which the insured is working at the beginning of a disabling event ... '' A less favorable definition would add the words , `` and is unable to work in any other occupation . '' Since many women are able to performthe primary duties of their occupation during the first two trimesters of a normal pregnancy , some carriers do not automatically consider a leave for pregnancy a trigger point to replace income . And , if they do , 90 days is a typical elimination period - a kind of `` time deductible '' before one qualifies for benefits - most women would probably not satisfy the elimination period before the baby was born anyway . If there were complications resulting from pregnancy , then that 's a whole different situation , and if they started to occur early enough in the pregnancy and did qualify under the definition of disability , the elimination period would theoretically start sooner and benefits might be paid out before birth . If you are beginning a new job and think you might become pregnant or intend to become pregnant during the time you are employed with that company , be sure to ask Human Resources if the company provides disability insurance as a group benefit and if the coverage includes normal pregnancy .
Unfortunately , you can not get disability insurance in Kentucky , at least not a policy that would not have an exclusion for pregnancy and childbirth , while you are pregnant . This is true for all 50 states in the US . Short term disability insurance will cover normal pregnancy and childbirth , and long term disability insurance will cover complications of pregnancy and childbirth . But that coverage must be purchased before becoming pregnant .
I am glad that this question was asked . Now that the Affordable Care Act is in force you will be able to buy individual insurance that will cover maternity even if you are already pregnant . Prior to Jan. 1 , 2014 it was virtually impossible to find an individual policy to cover that . It was mostly found in a Group Health Insurance Plan from your employer . As long as you stick with one of the major insurance companies you will be fine . I would shop around and find the plan that makes sense to you but no matter who you but it from as long as it is a qualified health plan then the policy has to cover the 10 essential health care requirements . All you must figure out is deductible and coinsurance . If you pay a higher premium per month then you will have low or no deductibles , If you want a lower monthly payment then you may have higher copay 's and deductibles at the time of service .
Since disability insurance pays for time off for pregnancy and childbirth , being pregnant is considered a pre-existing condition and you can not usually apply for disability insurance while pregnant . In my experience , the application is postponed until after the baby is born , but you might be able to modify the policy to exclude pregnancy related disability so that you can go forward with the application .
Yes , unfortunately , pregnancy is a pre-existing condition for disability insurance if you apply while pregnant . If you applied before becoming pregnant , obviously , then the pregnancy would not be a pre-existing condition . However , some polices may require that you apply several months before you become pregnant in order to qualify .
No , pregnancy is considered a pre-existing condition , and you can not get maternity disability insurance while pregnant . There may be an exception somewhere , but it is highly doubtful . Even most group plans require that you have worked at the business before becoming pregnant in order to use disability benefits for normal pregnancy .
If you were to purchase a short term disability policy while being four months pregnant , there will almost certainly be an exclusion on your policy that will exclude payment if time is taken off for any reason related to pregnancy or childbirth . If you had long term disability in place when you got pregnant , it should pay for bed rest due to complications during your 8th month of pregnancy . Congratulations and best wishes .
Yes , there are some companies that require medical underwriting that will allow a pregnant woman to apply in her first two trimesters . There are some No Exam companies that will allow a woman to apply while pregnant in any trimester . You must be within the policy 's weight guidelines and not be experiencing complications due to pregnancy in order to obtain a policy while pregnant , unless the policy has very few health questions -LRB- simplified or guaranteed issue -RRB- , in which case those things might not matter .
To get Disability Insurance to cover normal pregnancy , you need Short Term Disability . Most people get this type of policy paid for through their work , or are offered a group short term policy that they can pay for on their own . If purchasing an individual short term disability policy , you must apply for it before you are pregnant . Long term disability insurance will cover pregnancy that involves complications .
Yes you can get health insurance when pregnant , but there are limitations . There are three places to turn . You can enroll in a group health plan through your employer . HIPPA prevents group plans from excluding pregnancy as a pre-existing condition even if you had no prior coverage . You would enroll during your open enrollment . You can opt into an Affordable Care Act plan in your state marketplace during open enrollment . The policy would take effect on January 1 . Any pregnancy related medical expenses would be immediately covered . Medicaid provides immediate coverage for pregnant women who meet income guidelines . There are no open enrollment limitations for Medicaid .
I am not aware of any carrier that will issue a life insurance policy to a pregnant female . There are many risk factors to consider which make it impossible to properly price the risk of a life insurance policy on a woman that is pregnant . Every carrier I am aware of will not consider an application until the pregnancy has ended and the woman has been released from her doctor 's care .
All health insurance plans now cover maternity . They handle maternity just like any other claim . So how much it would cost you depends on the plan you get ... . What is the deductible ? What is the out-of-pocket maximum ? If you 're buying a plan specifically because you see childbirth down the road , consider 2 things : If you 're pregnant now , you ca n't get insurance because you 've obviously got a pre-existing condition . If you 're not pregnant now , and you 're buying a new plan , then you 'll have to replacethe planby January anywaydue tohealthcare reform . So if you want health insurance now , there 's really no reason to factor childbirth into the equasion because you 'll be changing plans -LRB- due to healthcare reform -RRB- before you deliver .
If your daughter had health insurance at least a year before she got pregnant them yes , it will be covered . Read the fine print on the policy.If she tries to get insurance after discovering she was pregnant , then it is considered a pre-existing condition and she wo n't be covered unless there is a complication during labor .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Much Renters Insurance Should I Require ?
If you are asking as a landlord , any renters insurance that a tenant has is better than no renters insurance coverage . Most companies offer 100000 of liability coverage as a default but in most cases that limit can be raised without a lot of cost difference . I would suggest contacting a local agent as a starting point to discuss your coverage concerns and what products they may have available within your area . If you wish to protect yourself better from legalities I would recommend consulting with a local attorney .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
There 's no exact figure on how much coverage someone should have and we all have our own needs and cost tolerance . A good way to figure out how much coverage you should have is by totalling up the debts and other expenses you want to have paid off in the event you passed away suddenly -LRB- e.g. mortgage , cars , kids college expenses , credit cards , other loans , etc. -RRB- . Then determine the amount of income needed for your spouse and kids if you died - this is generally around 70 % of current income amount - and multiply that by the number of years you want to make sure they 're taken care of at that level -LRB- e.g. 5 years , 7 years , 10 years , etc. -RRB- . If you have investment income or other sources of savings , the total amount of coverage needed may vary . This is a good starting point and should help you create an approximated figure of how much coverage you should have in place . The number of years of coverage depends on the need -LRB- some may be 15 years , some 20 , some 30 , etc. -RRB- . You should consult with an independent life insurance broker who can work with you on a personal level to determine how much coverage you should have to meet your goals and create a suitable structure for your budget . In many cases , you will likely need a larger amount of coverage for the next few years and less coverage down the line . For example , you can structure your coverage to have $ 1,000,000 of coverage for the next 20 years and have it drop down to $ 500,000 for years 21-30 . If you need coverage for more than 30 years -LRB- most do -RRB- , you should consider supplementing the term insurance coverage with a permanent insurance policy -LRB- universal life or whole life -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
You may be required to purchase Renters Insurance . It depends if this is a requirement in your rental agreement or lease agreement . Some properties do require renters insurance to cover their interest . Renters Insurance also covers general liability and most leasing agency 's require a minimum of $ 100,000 in liability insurance . They do not care how much personal property you insure as long as the liability insurance is there . These policy 's can be very inexpensive especially for example if you buy the minimum policy $ 5.000 in personal property is usually the lowest you can buy , and $ 100,000 in liability for around $ 10.00 per month
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Identity Theft ?
It will depend on the policy , but most companies offer identity theft protection now a days for an additional premium . The best thing to do would be check your policy or contact your local agent and see if that is included and if not see if your company offers that .
You can find stripped down Renters Insurance policies for as little as $ 50.00 per year from any local agent if you have good credit . Most people spend about $ 150.00 per year on Renters Insurance as they find value in some of the optional endorsements , such as personal property replacement cost -LRB- which allows you to buy new items without a deduction for depreciation if you have a claim -RRB- . Most of my customers add identity theft insurance to their policies so they can file a claim if they are the victim of identity theft . It will help restore incorrect info and pay attorney fees and some time off of work . In short , a basic policy wo n't cost much , but for a few extra dollars per month you can get much better coverage . What state are you in ? I may be able to help you . Send me an email !
For protection against medical identity theft , you should consider leaving your Medicare card at home . Instead , carry a copy of your Medicare card with you and blot out the last 4 digits of your Social Security Number . Leave your original Medicare card at home and carry the duplicate . You can read about Medicare identity theft and ways to protect yourself by reading the following article . WEBSITELINK
There are many ways to purchase renters insurance online . Most major insurance companies will allow you to purchase directly thorugh their websites . There are also websites that give you access to many different companies at once . However , there are some things that concern me about purchasing insurance online . As a former agent for a top 3 insurance company , I would become the `` agent '' for individuals who had purchased their own insurance online . I consistently found problems and lack of coverage when I recevied these clients . My recommendation is to reach out to a local independent agent and tell them you are looking for renters insurance . This will give you the opportunity to build a relationship with that person and have them make recommendations for certain coverages . There are many additional coverages that are available on renters policies from water back-up , to identity theft coverage , and specific coverage for jewelry , collectibles , music equipment , etc. . It is best to discuss these options with a professional so you know exatly what is covered and how it is covered . While you can quickly purchase renters insurance online , you may leave yourself with gaps in coverage , which can become costly in the event of a claim . The process is not that much slower within an agency -LRB- we frequently put polices in place the same day -RRB- and you can be confident that you have the proper coverages . If you do not feel comfortable with the agent you are in contact with , ask friends and family who they work with and find someone you truly trust . Even though you are purchasing a fairly inexpensive renters policy , take your time to find the right solution for you . In the unfortunate event of a claim , you will be happy that you did .
Unfortunately , Geico does not carry Disability Insurance . Geico mainly carries property-casualty insurance , including home , condo , co-op , mobile home , flood , and renter 's insurance ; auto , commercial auto , collector car , motorcycle , ATV , boat , water craft , snowmobile , and umbrella insurance ; overseas and business insurance ; identity theft insurance ; and life insurance from an outside source .
Most people can buy a basic Renter 's Insurance policy for about $ 12.00 / month . The rates are affected by where you live , how much personal property you own , and your credit -LRB- good credit and you will pay less , bad credit and you will pay more -RRB- . I have seen policies for as little as $ 55.00 / year , but it 's worth asking about options and endorsements that will broaden your coverage , like Identity Theft coverage .
The are several variables to consider when purchasing home insurance . The first step is to determine the Replacement Cost of your home . Replacement Cost is not the purchase price or assessed value but rather the cost to rebuild your home . Next you want to review the other lines of coverage and make sure these limits meet your needs . After this you should ask what optional coverages are available such as Water/Sewer Back up , Ordinance and Law , Personal Injury , Identity Theft , Extended Replacement Cost or Guaranteed Replacement Cost . One policy does not fit all and there can be a big difference in coverages from one company to the next so make sure you take the time necessary to protect your home .
If you 're insured with a reputable company and a good agent , your renters policy should include theft . All a renters policy is is a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It 's there to cover your stuff and your liability . It 's rare , but there are companies that offer coverage that may not include theft . This coverage form is called `` Basic Form '' and it will not cover theft . Never , never , never accept a policy written on a basic form for your renters coverage . The most common form is Broad Form , and it will cover theft . Most companies and agents will use this when writing your renters policy . Do n't accept anything less .
-- > Normal 0 Renters -LRB- Tenant/Homeowners -RRB- Insurance policies will usually cover your personal property anywhere in the world . Of course , most tenant / homeowner policies also provide coverage on a named peril basis and theft is usually a specifically defined covered peril . So , in a general sense , renters policies should cover theft of your covered personal property while it is away from your home subject to the policys exclusions and limitations . Common limitations include : no coverage for theft from a dwelling under construction -LRB- often can be added -RRB- , theft from another residence you own or rent unless you are temporarily residing there , theft from the part of a residence you rent to someone , theft of boats , their equipment , trailers or campers , etc. .
It will depend on the policy , but most companies offer identity theft protection now a days for an additional premium . The best thing to do would be check your policy or contact your local agent and see if that is included and if not see if your company offers that .
You can laminate your Medicare card , but why do that ? Even though CMS -LRB- Medicare -RRB- `` requires '' you to carry your Medicare card at all times it is not a good idea . Medicare identity theft is big business and plays a major role in Medicare fraud . Rather than carrying your Medicare card , make a copy of the card and blot out the last 4 digits .
Homeowners insurance is comprised of several variables but I 'll discuss some of the major components . First and foremost you want a Replacement Cost policy . Second , you need to work with your agent to determine the proper amount of Replacement Cost coverage -LRB- the cost to rebuild your home -RRB- . Once this amount is determined the other coverage lines are a percentage of the dwelling coverage . Here 's an example of the major components : Dwelling - $ 500,000 Other Structures - $ 50,000 -LRB- 10 % -RRB- Personal Property - $ 350,000 -LRB- 70 % -RRB- Next , you need to select your deductible . Deductibles typically range from $ 500 - % of your dwelling coverage . I recommend at least a $ 1,000 deductible because you do not want to file small claims on a home policy . There are other optional coverages that are very important such as Water/Sewer Backup and Law and Ordinance coverage . Identity Theft and scheduled items can also be added . As always it 's best to discuss your options with an independent agent who can present several options specific to your needs .
Renters Insurance premium is based on several things such as location , type of building/apartment you rent , and insurance scores but mainly the premium is determined on the value of your contents -LRB- all your stuff -RRB- that you want to protect and the deductible that you choose . Since we all do n't have an identical amount of stuff - it 's hard to say what the average cost would be . But what I can do is give you an example . A personwhorents a single home in NEPA which an middle insurance score who has $ 50,000 worth of contents and a $ 1000 deductible has an annual premium of $ 180.00 . This includes replacement cost - money to buy identical or similar items , as opposed to actual cash value , which would be cheaper yet . Of course , there are many discounts available as well such as multipolicy discounts , alarm discounts , and advance quote discounts . If you would like more information on PA Renter 's Insurance - please contact me .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
Renters insurance does not cover vehicle theft . Vehicle theft would be covered under your auto insurance policy provided you carry comprehensive coverage on your auto policy . However , if you have a renters insurance policy and some of your personal items were in the vehicle that was stolen they may be covered by your renters policy as long as the items are personal items and not part of the vehicle .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
The renters insurance coverage is rated based upon : 1 . Geographic Area : two identical policies with same limits will be charged at a different rate in Portland , OR and Seattle , WA . 2 . Personal property replacement cost -LRB- or ACV - actual cash value -RRB- 3 . Personal liability limit 4 . Loss of use limit You can get an instant quote and compare renters insurance proposals on WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Why Do I Pay So Much For Car Insurance ?
That 's really a personal question . Your rate for auto insurance is determined by many factors . Some of those factors are your motor vehicle record , your claims history , your age , your geographic location , themake/model and year of the vehicle you are insuring , the number of vehicles on the policy , the number of drivers on the policy , and many other factors . If you believe that you are paying too much for your coverage call around and see what other carriers in your area have to offer , but remember that you get what you pay for sometimes .
If you want to know the real cost of auto insurance , go without . When you are in an accident , pay the victims out of your pocket , repair the other parties vehicle and yours and then deal with the lawsuits that will follow for lost wages , permanent injuries etc. . Even the best driver can be involved in a collision that is why they are called , accidents .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why get whole life insurance ? I ca n't give you a reason why you should , only why I did . I wanted a locked in price the day I bought it , till the day I died . I wanted something to work both if I died too early or lived too long . I wanted something I owned , that could not be taken away later on . I wanted to control the policy , not the insurance company . I wanted to take away an insurance company 's ability to say no to me . I wanted a safe place to put money to let it grow , to cover for my other investment choices . I wanted a place to access cash if needed , where I did n't have to explain to a guy in a cubicle `` why ? '' and get his blessing . If any of these reasons work for you , by all means consider the choice .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
Great Question on classic car insurance . Normally classic car insurance offers limited use on the car or miles so the insurance company has a restriction on the use of the car . You have to have a second car to drive on a daily basis to quality for classic car insurance so that is why the premium is less on that type of insurance .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
The question , `` How do I determine how much life insurance do I need '' is one that should be asked by everyone and re-evaluated every year or so . Why ? Because things and circumstances change . There are a number of formulas that are popular with insurance sellers , so the answer you get will depend on who you ask . I would ask you , `` how much do you need for WHAT ? '' In other words : what is your goal for your insurance ? If you have over $ 5.2 million in assets you may want your life insurance to protect your heirs from the tax liability of your estate . If not and your mortgage and credit is all paid off , you may just want your beneficiary to be able to maintain the life style you 've provided for them for the rest of their life . If you still have a mortgage and credit bill you may want to make sure those are all paid in the event of your demise . Or your `` what '' may be a combination of things . That is why you need to work with an agent who will truly look out for your best interests and ask you the right questions .
Having been in a similar situation I would say `` no '' . Why ? Your chiropractor knows there is a limited amount of time to file with an insurance company for payment . Usually about a year . After that , the insurance company is not obligated to pay the claim . Pretty much neither are you . Why ? you did n't hire his/her accounts receivable clerk . Your chiropractor has a professional responsibility to handle the billing end of their practice along with the treatment end . 5 years late is beyond `` reasonable '' to bill . They screwed up and probably with more than just you . This is sort of a fishing trip to see who bites on their office 's lack of follow through . It is basically stating `` I ca n't run my business professionally , please cover for my mistakes . '' I would n't ignore them , I would talk to them about it and state why I did n't feel the need to pay .
That is an excellent question ! Honestly , I really do n't believe so , and I 'll tell you why . The first reason is that you do n't have any idea who you are speaking with , and whether they will be there if you need them . Maybe I 'm old school , but if I 'm going to be giving someone my money and expecting them to be a part of protecting my family , I want to know them . I do n't trust giving my family to a faceless , impersonal website . The second is the security of my personal information - who sees it , how well is it protected , and how do I know where it went ? With the rate that companies seem to be hacked , I think I prefer knowing my stuff is locked in a cabinet somewhere vs. floating around in cyberspace , available to whomever . The third reason is that the internet prices shown to lure you in are `` best scenario '' prices always - they are the worm on the hook , and far too often are n't what your price is after they 've underwritten the policy . With a live agent , that is much less likely to happen . Can it be safe to buy online ? Probably . Would I personally do it ? No . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
I have a hard time imaging how backdating a car insurance policy could ever be good for the insurance carrier so , all the carriers I am familiar with refuse and prohibit backdating . I can think of a couple of reasons it is desirable to backdate insurance from the customer point of view : 1 -RRB- To be able to prove insurance to a regulatory or financial entity on a certain prior date when coverage was not maintained . 2 -RRB- To be able to obtain coverage for a loss and avoid out of pocket expenses on a certain prior date when no coverage existed . Most carriers carefully underwrite the reason why any date but the present date is installed on an application for insurance . It is often also true that state law makes it illegal for an agent to backdate coverage . It does n't matter if it is car insurance , home insurance , or even life insurance , backdating is a bad idea for the insurer and the agency or agent . On this point , however , there are companies in the life insurance portion of my business that will permit backdating to save age . They wo n't accept this provision if the insured is not healthy or there are health events that create concern in the period of time back to the prior birth date . If you are not healthy now , they wo n't issue the coverage . Then , if they agree , all the premium back to the prior date will need to be paid but , the customer will enjoy a permanently lower rate based upon the prior age so this is the only time I am aware of when backdating - and I use the term very loosely here - is permitted on a written insurance policy . On car insurance , no backdating method I know of exists for all the reasons I have written -LRB- and some I have n't -RRB- .
This really is n't an insurance question as a political one . I can only offer my opinion and it may not be agreeable to some depending on where you live . Do I think gun owners should carry liability insurance by mandate ? Yes , I do . And I will tell you why . Accidents happen . Guns get discharged accidently , hunters and hikers are accidently shot every year . What happens when the person who has been shot , but not killed ? Who pays their bills ? Who covers the cost of their care ? Should the person responsible be able to say , sorry I have no insurance , too bad for you . Someone already cited `` part '' of the 2nd amendment in a post . Let me add the other part , '' A well regulated Militia '' . I am a well regulated insurance agent , which means I am licensed for insurance sales and required to carry `` E&O -LRB- errors and omissions -RRB- insurance '' to protect the consumer . If by accident I were to cause harm , there would be coverage to help them . It 's an expense to me as I pay for this coverage . I do n't mind that much because if for some reason , by accident I created a harmful situation I would want to provide more than an I 'm sorry .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Much Does A Medicare Supplement Plan Cost ?
The cost or monthly premium of a Medicare Supplement Plan can vary widely depending on what state you live in , how old you are and your smoking status . In some cases what part of the state you live in will vary the cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan . It also depends on which plan you want . All Medicare Supplement Plans will have a letter -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan J , Plan G and so on -RRB- and any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medicare Supplement . The best way to find out what a Medicare Supplement Plan would cost you is to run a quote on our website at SummitMedigap.com . You will be able to compare Medicare Supplement Plans instantly online . We can also help answer all of your questions and help you decide on the best plan for your specific needs . You can also reach us at 1-888-407-8664 .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
The cost or monthly premium of a Medicare Supplement Plan can vary widely depending on what state you live in , how old you are and your smoking status . In some cases what part of the state you live in will vary the cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan . It also depends on which plan you want . All Medicare Supplement Plans will have a letter -LRB- i.e. Plan F , Plan J , Plan G and so on -RRB- and any plan that does not have a letter is not a Medicare Supplement . The best way to find out what a Medicare Supplement Plan would cost you is to run a quote on our website at SummitMedigap.com . You will be able to compare Medicare Supplement Plans instantly online . We can also help answer all of your questions and help you decide on the best plan for your specific needs . You can also reach us at 1-888-407-8664 .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
The question is difficult to answer because of the amount of variables involved but I will try to cover all the bases . If you want a Medicare supplement that is going to cover all Medical expenses approved but not covered in full by Medicare , you would go with a plan G or Plan F. Plan G has a deductible of $ 166 but after it has been met , it is the same as a plan F which covers the $ 166 Part B deductible . So for full coverage , go with Plan F or G but they will cost you the most a well . If you have a high amount of medical care , the math will work on these plans . If you do not utilize a lot of care , you will be spending the money on premium every month but getting your moneys worth out of it . For those that have low/basic medical needs , you could try a lower cost option . Plans K , L and High F supplements can all be good options to consider . Like all Medicare supplements , you can still go to any doctor that accepts Medicare when using these plans . Depending on the state you live in and company you choose the price points will vary between the three plans . In a nutshell here is what they cover . Plan L - covers 75 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare Plan K - covers 50 % of the costs not covered by Original Medicare High F - covers 100 % of costs not covered by Medicare after a deductible of $ 2,180 has been met . The deductible is not a true deductible but means that you only pay the deductibles and copays not covered by original Medicare . Original Medicare still provides the benefits you would normally get but the High F plan does not cover the left over costs until the $ 2,180 has been met . High F usually has the lowest price point of the three plans . In some states , the premium can be as low as $ 28 a month for the plan . Given it is a supplement , you would still need to buy a drug plan if you wanted RX coverage .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can Life Insurance Companies Cancel Your Policy If You Get Kidney Failure ?
One of the benefits of life insurance is that you do not have to keep qualifying for it over and over again . Once you have the policy , it is yours to keep , and as long as you keep paying premiums , no one can take it away from you for any reason .
No ! The only way a carrier can cancel your policy is if you do n't pay your premiums -LRB- the coverage lapsing as a result -RRB- . If the condition developed after the policy was placed in force , the carrier can not cancel your policy . Please note , if you intentionally lied on the application for the coverage and it was a pre-existing condition prior to placing it in force and you 're still within the first 2 years of the policy -LRB- the contestability period -RRB- , the carrier could rescind the coverage if it 's discovered . Once the contestability period has expired , the carrier can not rescind a policy due to misinformation on an application . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! Two of the best reasons to buy Life Insurance at an early age is to first lock in a low price , and second insure against any health issues you might have as you grow older . No reputable company will drop you for developing health issues , and that should be clearly stated in your policy . If you 've made your payments on time , you should have nothing at all to worry about . The only legal way that a company could drop you is if there was reason to doubt the truthfulness of your answers on the application when it was submitted , and your policy is less than two years old . Other than that , you should have no problem keeping your policy . Thanks for asking !
Most people experience deterioration in their health as they age . The discovery of any condition previously unknown to you , the insured , does not affect an existing life insurance policy in any way . This is true if the condition were to become noticed within days after the policy is issued . This is an important reason to secure life insurance while your health is good .
ESRD stands for End-Stage Renal Disease . This represents a complete kidney failure requiring dialysis or a kidney transplant . ESRD is one way that people can qualify for Medicare before they turn 65 . However , many Medicare Supplements and Medicare Advantage plans will not accept patients who have Medicare because of ESRD .
There are several ways an individual can enroll into Medicare . They are : 1 . turning age 65 and are eligible for social security retirement benefits . 2 . have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 months regardless of age . 3 . renal failure/kidney failure needing kidney dialysis or are eligible or had received a kidney transplant regardless of age . . please contact me if you have further questions . pauljrosen@aol.com
If you are 65 or older , you can get Medicare Part A if you have n't worked , as long as your spouse or divorced spouse has worked enough hours to receive Medicare , and if your spouse or divorced spouse is at least age 62 . Also , you can get Medicare if you get Social Security . Getting Social Security benefits only requires a 10 year work history for you or a spouse , or less if the employed spouse dies at a very young age . There are some other caveats dealing with SSDI , railroad , kidney failure and more . See WEBSITELINK for more details .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
Generally , you are eligible for Medicare if you or your spouse worked for at least 10 years in Medicare-covered employment and you are 65 years or older and a citizen or permanent resident of the United States . If you arent yet 65 , you might also qualify for coverage if you have a disability or with End-Stage Renal disease -LRB- permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or transplant -RRB- . Here are some simple guidelines . You can get Part A at age 65 without having to pay premiums if : You already get retirement benefits from Social Security or the Railroad Retirement Board . You are eligible to get Social Security or Railroad benefits but have n't yet filed for them . You or your spouse had Medicare-covered government employment . If you are under 65 , you can get Part A without having to pay premiums if you have : Received Social Security or Railroad Retirement Board disability benefits for 24 months . End-Stage Renal Disease and meet certain requirements . While you do not have to pay a premium for Part A if you meet one of these conditions , you must pay for Part B if you want it . The Part B monthly premium in 2013 is $ 104.90 per month . It is deducted from your Social Security , Railroad Retirement , or Civil Service Retirement check . If you dont get any of the above payments , Medicare sends you a bill for your Part B premium every 3 months . Note : You will be eligible for Medicare when you turn 65 even if you are not eligible for Social Security retirement benefits .
If you are on dialysis due to kidney failure , you can still get guaranteed issue life insurance , if you fit those age guidelines . It will be graded during the first 2-3 years , which means that it would pay a limited death benefit if you passed away due to natural causes during that time . Accidental death usually pays 100 % from day one .
In order to qualify to get a Long Term Care Insurance policy , you must fill out an application and take an exam . The application goes to underwriting where it is determined if your health is good enough to get approved . If it is , you are issued a LTC policy . Some health conditions that would cause a decline are AIDS , ALS , Alzheimers , dementia , kidney failure , liver cirrhosis , and Parkinsons . Certain mood disorders , moderate to severe arthritis , MS , advanced diabetes and/or heart disease , stroke , and other conditions that can lead to inability to care for one 's self are also potential hindrances to qualifying for Long Term Care Insurance . To find out whether you qualify for Long Term Care Insurance , call or visit an agent that carries several LTC choices and answer all their questions . It is much easier to find out ahead of time if you can not qualify , than it is to be declined later . This way you can also get the policy that has your best price if you do qualify .
The difference between life insurance and critical illness is that life insurance pays in the event of an unfortunate mishap upon the life of the policyholder . Life insurance pays an accelerated benefits upon the event of terminal illness in order to pay for medical bills including a waiver of premium for the time . Critical illness is a cash indemnity policy that pays cash benefits in lump sum tax free . Heart attack , stroke , kidney failure , and cancer are all covered . Lump sum payments are from 20,000 to 1,000,000 depending on company and policy .
What is covered with critical illness insurance is spelled out in each policy , and differs from company to company . The basic critical illnesses are stroke , heart attack and some types of cancer . The cancer is usually the more serious kind , although some policies will pay a partial benefit for milder types of cancer . Some other critical illnesses that may be covered are organ transplant , Parkinson 's , Alzheimer 's , kidney failure , coronary bypass , blindness , deafness , or paralysis .
It depends on the policy , but here are a few of the more common ones . Heart attack , stroke , cancer -LRB- internal and some skin cancers -RRB- , ALS , MS , kidney failure , Parkinson 's , blindness . Each policy is different both in terms of what is covered and the definition . Always buy a health insurance policy not a life policy with a rider .
That is a great question ! The vast majority of people get Medicare when they are turning 65 . The program will allow people under the age of 65 to enroll under certain conditions , like kidney failure , or if you have been on disability for a designated amount of time . The program is designed to help Senior Citizens afford health care , so unless you meet the exceptions , you will need to be 65 or older to enroll . Thanks for asking !
When you qualify for medicare when you reach your social security retirement age . There are also three events that can happen prior to your reaching your social security retirement age that would qualify you for medicare ; they are : 1 . You are on Social Security Disability for 24 months and continue to be eligible for it 2 . You are diagnosed with end stage kidney failure 3 . You are diagnosed with ALS and have received SSDI benefits for at least one month .
Critical Illness Insurance covers three basic conditions : heart attack , stroke , and some types of cancer . Depending on the features of the policy , critical illness insurance can also cover heart transplant , coronary bypass surgery , angioplasty , kidney failure , major organ transplant , paralysis , Alzheimer 's disease , deafness , blindness , MS , HIV/AID contracted through a medical procedure , Parkinson 's disease , or a terminal illness .
Stroke , heart attack and certain types and stages of cancer are standard conditions covered by critical illness insurance . Individual policies will specify the conditions that they cover , and can include : major organ transplants , loss of hearing or sight or speech , coronary artery angioplasty or bypass , paralysis , persistent vegetative state , Parkinson 's , Alzheimers , kidney failure , MS , CF , MD , severe burns or some other health conditions . Some policies will also pay a partial benefit for less serious health conditions .
That is a great question ! The vast majority of people will enroll as they near their 65th birthday . That is when you become eligible , unless there are special circumstances . Kidney failure is one , and having it regardless of age can allow you to become eligible . Extended disability is another . Thanks for asking !
Having excellant health coverge is a great start as it would cover most if not all of your expenses . There are some companies that offer coverage for cancer only or a heart attack only . US Health Advisors offer MedGuard which covers all critical illiness such as cancer , heart attack , stroke , kidney failure etc. . As a stand alone product or part of health plan policy MedGuard will pay a lump sum to you directly to use at your discretion . You could use it to pay your deductible and co insurance and still have a balance to put towards personal expenses while you recover .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Kind Of Health Insurance Does The Military Have ?
Active military and National Guard are covered by TRICARE , a health care program for service members and their families around the world . TRICARE is the major part of the Military Health System , a system that utilizes combined resources of military hospitals and clinics with civilian health care networks , as well as a combination of different coverage options depending on where the person is currently stationed . TRICARE coverage does meet the requirements for having minimum essential benefits as called for under the Affordable Care Act .
Active military and National Guard are covered by TRICARE , a health care program for service members and their families around the world . TRICARE is the major part of the Military Health System , a system that utilizes combined resources of military hospitals and clinics with civilian health care networks , as well as a combination of different coverage options depending on where the person is currently stationed . TRICARE coverage does meet the requirements for having minimum essential benefits as called for under the Affordable Care Act .
Some life insurance does cover active military but some does not . Many companies wo n't issue a policy to you if you are active duty . Look for companies life the Armed Forces Benefit Association/5-Star Life which specialize in military families . Also the United States Automobile Association/USAA works mainly with military families .
That is a great question ! Regular life insurance companies will not insure anyone that is in the military , or in an area where military action is likely . Insurance companies are all about the risk of loss , and being in the military greatly increases that risk . As a result , the federal Government offers life insurance for the members of the military , so that their families can be protected also . That is what Servicemen Group Life is . I hope that helps . Thanks for asking !
USAA was formed by military officers for military officers and enlisted personnel . Anyone who is currently in the military , or retired with an honorable discharge can join . There are ways to join if you are n't or were n't in the military . These are : One of your parents was in the military and has purchased an auto or home policy ; You are a widow/widower or former -LRB- unremarried -RRB- spouse of a member who had purchased auto or home insurance ; Attending one of the service academies or in advanced ROTC at a college/university . I 'm not sure how many generations a membership can be passed down . I have a membership through my father-in-law who served in the Navy during WWII , and my son has a membership through me and my wife . I think a membership can only be passed down two generations , but I do n't know that for sure . It 's a great organization . If you are eligible , I strongly recommend you join . They have lots of great benefits besides insurance .
Members of the National Guard have access to inexpensive health insurance through the military 's Tricare system that combines the health resources of the military with networks of civilian health care professionals , institutions , pharmacies and suppliers to provide affordable access to high-quality health care services around the world . While it can be a major money-saving benefit for military families , it 's a very complex system with countless terms and conditions . If you are eligible , you should take time to understand their eligibility and enroll in the plan that best meets your needs .
Yes the military offers life insurance through -LRB- USAA -RRB- which is a good place to start being they specialize in the military . There are other companies that deal with military personnel also such as Peterson International they deal with high risk clients such as military , football players . construction workers etc. . John Cole Virtual Financial Group Recruiter / Manager Living Benefits .
No , while USAA does offer many different types of insurance products , USAA does not offer Disability Insurance . If associated with the military and having a disability incurred to military service , the VA will pay disability benefits . If you are looking to purchase Disability Insurance while working in the private sector , there are many other Life Insurance companies through which you can purchase it .
A military pension is a non-qualified retirement plan . It is provided in the public sector , does not offer a vesting schedule for early retirees , does not require membership in the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp , and is not under ERISA . The FAS US Military annuity payment -LRB- distribution -RRB- from form 1099 is non-qualified .
No , military retirement is not a qualified plan . It does not offer a vesting schedule for early retirees , it does not require membership in the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp , and the money received through their retirement plan is considered wages and not pension monies . Therefore , the retirement plan offered by the military is non-qualified .
No , the Military 's retirement plan is not a qualified plan ; it is a public sector retirement plan that is not covered by ERISA . Military retirement does not offer a vesting schedule and does not require membership in the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp , which provides security for failed pension plans .
The following people are eligible to apply for USAA Auto insurance : Active , retired and honorably separated officers and enlisted personnel of the U.S. military . Officer candidates in commissioning programs -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . Adult children whose eligible parents have or had a USAA auto or property insurance product . Widows and widowers of USAA members who have or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy . If you or your spouse served in the military , you will need to provide the following information for that person : Date of birth Social Security number USAA number Military enlistment , commissioning , retirement or separation date
Their recent T.V. commercials are pretty good , with the people of all ages , who state that they have a USAA policy through various military service and family connections . The first level of those who are eligible for their policies are active , retired and/or enlisted U.S. military personnel . Also eligible are Officer Candidate personnel , such as ROTC and other military service candidate programs . Additionally , the adult -LRB- 18 + age -RRB- children of parents who either had or currently have a USAA auto or home product and widows or widowers of former USAA auto and home policyholders are eligible .
The military can provide options to obtaining Life Insurance and will encourage you to get all your affairs in order including Life Insurance before deployment . From what I understand , there is a small cost to this coverage . Mainstream companies which the general public has access to usually will not provide coverage to those military personnel who are deployed to what we call `` hot zones '' . Every Life Insurance Company has an updated list which is considered `` hot '' and will tend to decline coverage , or rate it higher as the likelihood of being killed is much higher .
The Military does offer three retirement plans . The one that you would receive is based on your DIEMS -LRB- Date of Entry Into Military Service -RRB- . They are called Final Pay , High-3 , and REDUX . Benefits are calculated based on your number of years in service , the year you will retire , basic monthly pay received , a multiplier , and cost of living factor .
As a former veteran myself , I remember having some of the best health care around . Military families usually have insurance called Tricare . Its close to free and it works great . The system works for Active Military as well as retirees .
No , the retirement plan offered by the military is not qualified . Public sector pension plans are not covered by ERISA -LRB- Employee Retirement Income Security Act -RRB- , and in order for a retirement plan to be qualified , it must meet the regulations set forth by ERISA . Therefore , the military 's retirement plan offered through the federal government is nonqualified .
To get USAA insurance , you must be a member of USAA . To be eligible to be a member of USAA , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You are an officer or enlisted personnel in the US military , or are retired or honorably separated from the US military . 2 -RRB- You are an officer candidate in a commissioning program -LRB- Academy , ROTC , OCS/OTS -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You are an adult child whose parent has or had a USAA auto or property insurance policy , . 4 -RRB- You are a widow or widower of a USAA member who had a USAA auto or property insurance policy .
yes , you can purchase life insurance through the Veterans Adminstration . This could be important life insuruance but are we assuming that the tendency to preclude `` military action '' in standard life insurance policies is not also included in those policies ? You better read the fine print and I would require the agent to give me a written statement that if I am killed in Military action '' then my family is protected as stated on page so and so in the policy and you need to have this discussion with your significant other
Im not sure if there is any free coverage . If there is it is a small amount . But all members of the military are eligible for subsidized coverage through the Department of Veterans Affairs . The program is called SGLI -LRB- Service-members Group Life Insurance -RRB- . It is super cheap and all members of the military should take advantage of it . It is a flat rate regardless of age/tobacco use/health . $ 400k costs $ 27/m When you retire you can convert it to the veterans group life plan . WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
How Much Does Medicare D Cover ?
This is a good question . Medicare part D or prescription drug plans cover certain amounts depending on your specific drugs . My clients normally give me their drugs and ask to find a plan -LRB- part D or C -RRB- that will save them the most money depending on what drugs they have . This is important for your broker / agent to do because they should be able to determine if you will end up in the donut hole -LRB- coverage gap -RRB- where you end up paying more for your meds later in the year .
Typically , inhalers -LRB- and the drugs administered by inhalers -RRB- are covered under Medicare Part D and not original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- . A nebulizer used at home may be covered under Part B as durable medical equipment , however , traditional inhalers and other inhalation type drugs would be covered under Part D . If you 're under original Medicare -LRB- and have/don ' t have a Medicare Supplement plan -RRB- and would like to have coverage for your inhalers -LRB- and the drugs administered by them -RRB- , you should secure a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan to have them covered . If you 're on Medicare Advantage instead , check to see if your plan includes prescription drug coverage as it may cover the inhalers as well . Please note , whichever type of health plan structure you have , drug coverage will have a shared cost involved . Be sure to check with your carrier to see how the inhalers will be covered and how much . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Part D , where do I apply ? What is the doughnut hole and how does it work ? How much does Medicare Part D cost ? Can I sign up for Part D at any time ? Which plan is the best one for me ? All good questions . The answer to where do you apply is this . You can apply through Medicare.gov You can sign up direct through a carrier Or you can find a good local insurance agent that specializes in Medicare plans
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an experienced life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a term insurance policy may be more suitable to the need than a permanent policy . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Once you 've figured out how much coverage you want and how long you need it for , you then need to find the carrier 's program that is going to offer the coverage at the lowest possible cost . This is where the risk classification comes in . This is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for . You also want to make sure of the type of coverage you have - full coverage or Accidental Death & Dismemberment -LRB- AD&D -RRB- . With full coverage , the proceeds are paid out whether death occurs by illness or injury . Under an AD&D policy , the policy only pays out if you die by a specified circumstance -LRB- e.g. a car crash -RRB- - if you die by illness and you have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit . This is important because people see the price of an AD&D policy and it looks very attractive because it 's cheap . That 's because you 're more likely to die by illness than you are of an injury . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
If youdefinehaving insurance coverage for your prescription drugs when you are age 65 + as `` good '' when prior to the Bush administration 's implementation of this plan seniors on traditional Medicare did n't , then Medicare Part D is definitely a good thing . In fact , some would argue that Medicare Part D , with its pesky reliance on private insurance options and marketplace competition , is the only part of Medicare that has delivered on it 's promises of expanding coverage for a high utilization population segment and managed to come in under initial cost projections . Medicare Part D is just another level of Medicare coverage specifically designed to address prescription drug coverage . As with Medicare supplement plans , different insurance carriers offer Medicare Part D plans with different levels of coverage and price points for consumers to select from during their initial eligibility period and subsequent open enrollment renewal years . This means that the consumer is obliged to shop around because not all Medicare Part D plans are created equal , far from it . Most consumers would be well served to use the services of an insurance broker who is knowledgeable in the various Medicare Part D plans available in their marketplace .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
You have asked a very complicated question . There is no simple answer , but I will try to give you an idea . Medicare has 4 parts . Part A is hospital insurance and has no premium . Part B is your health insurance and pretty much covers everything covered by Medicare other than hospital costs and post hospital skilled nursing . The premium for that varies according your your income . For most people , it is currently $ 104.90 per month -LRB- 2013 -RRB- and if you are taking your Social Security , it is deducted from your monthly payment . Part A and B constitute Original Medicare . Medicare Part C established Medicare Advantage plans , and Part D is prescription drug coverage . If you select an advantage plan , your insurance will be provided by an insurance company . These usually take the form of an HMO or PPO and have generally the same restrictions and exposure as a non Medicare HMO or PPO . Most include prescription drug coverage so you wo n't need a Part D. However , make sure your particular prescriptions are covered . If you select Original Medicare , you will probably want to choose a Medicare Supplement , or Medigap policy . These plans have a monthly premium , and do n't cover prescription drugs , but do lower your exposure to big expenses . Most of the plans do not have copayments . You can choose a supplement that covers all of the things that are covered by Medicare and lower your risk to virtually zero . While the plans are standardized , the premiums will vary from state to state and from company to company . If you choose a supplement , you will also need to pick a Part D prescription drug plan . The costs for these also vary and are influenced by the particular prescriptions you take . You can learn more at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , www.cms.gov .
To confirm whether Part B will cover Prolia and what conditions must be met to have it covered , you will need to contact Medicare directly . I believe Prolia has been covered under Medicare Part B for a number of years up to one injection every 6 months - typically required to be recommended by your physician . It can often be listed under Part D plans ' formularies as well , but as it is often administered by a doctor , it would typically be cited under Part B. Please note , Part D plans can change their coverage year to year - they are not guaranteed renewable and every plan is different . The drugs that a plan covers can change , the premiums , deductibles , copays , coinsurance , and other factors of a plan can change each year . Plans can even be terminated or replaced and therefore automatically disenroll the consumer , forcing them to select another plan . For the insured person , it 's vital they review their prescription drug coverage each year to determine what plan will best serve their needs for the coming year . When Prolia is covered under Part B , a Medicare Supplement plan might cover the other 20 % of the cost after Medicare pays it 's 80 % share . Whether the Medigap insurer will cover the other 20 % would need to be confirmed with a carrier - when it comes to drugs covered by Part B , there 's usually a couple extra conditions that have to be met for it to be covered as most drugs are covered by Part D. I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with Medicare Supplement help . Thanks very much .
For all intents and purposes , the answer is no . There are certain drugs , which must be prescribed , e.g. Cancer treatment drugs , that are covered under Medicare Part B. Drugs covered under Medicare Part B would also be covered under a Medigap policy . Most prescription drugs however are not covered by traditional Medicare -LRB- Parts A and B -RRB- or Medigap supplemental insurance . An eligible Medicare beneficiary needs a Part D prescription drug plan in order to obtain drug coverage . You can enroll in a Part D plan at Medicare.gov , subject to certain enrollment period restrictions . As an alternative to a stand alone Part D plan , a beneficiary can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan that includes Part D coverage -LRB- MAPD -RRB- . A beneficiary who enrolls in an MAPD can not have a Medigap policy or a stand alone Part D plan . It 's a good idea to find a licensed insurance agent who specializes in Medicare plans to review your needs and objectives and present you with optimal solutions .
Part A covers inpatient hospital stays , skilled nursing facility stays , home health visits -LRB- also covered under Part B -RRB- , and hospice care , and accounted for 32 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part A benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 1,184 per benefit period in 2013 -RRB- and coinsurance . Part B covers physician visits , outpatient services , preventive services , and home health visits , and accounted for 19 % of benefit spending in 2012 . Part B benefits are subject to a deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2013 -RRB- , and cost sharing generally applies for most Part B benefits . Part C refers to the Medicare Advantage program , through which beneficiaries can enroll in a private health plan , such as a health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- , and receive all Medicare-covered benefits . Payments to Medicare Advantage plans to cover Part A and Part B benefits accounted for 23 % of benefit spending in 2012 . More than 13 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Advantage plan in 2012 -LRB- 27 % of all beneficiaries -RRB- . Part D is the voluntary , subsidized outpatient prescription drug benefit , with additional subsidies for beneficiaries with low incomes and modest assets . The Part D benefit is offered through private plans that contract with Medicare , both stand-alone prescription drug plans -LRB- PDPs -RRB- and Medicare Advantage prescription drug plans -LRB- MA-PDs -RRB- . In 2012 , Part D accounted for 10 % of benefit spending . About 32 million beneficiaries were enrolled in a Medicare Part D plan in 2012 .
Medicare Part D is your prescription drug plan . It is a good idea to have a Part D plan in addition to a Medicare Supplement Plan . When someone turns 65 they go on Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B . They get Part D to cover prescriptions and a Medicare Supplement Plan to cover what Part A & B does not .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
That 's an interesting question - do you mean how much coverage do you need to purchase to ensure the value of your belongings are covered adequately , or how much should the policy have paid out to you after your claim was processed ? In the case of coverage , you would need to have an idea of how much value there is to be insured . For example , do you have a lot of electronics , or jewelry ? If so , you would need more coverage than someone who has very few of those things . If you meant how much should you have received , that depends on a lot of things specific to your policy and claim . If you would like more information , I 'd be happy to help , just contact me . Thanks for asking !
The Federal program known as Medicare does not have comprehensive prescription coverage . Medicare Part A covers hospitalization and Medicare Part B covers doctors visits . Medicare Part D is the prescription drug coverage and Medicare Part C is a plan that combines Parts A & B -LRB- and often D -RRB- into one plan . Both Parts C & D are run by private insurance companies which contract with the Federal government to offer these plans .
Basic Medicare , that is Medicare part a , does not cover any prescriptions outside of what 's administered during a hospital stay . If you have Medicare part D or Medicare Advantage prescription drugs are covered as part of your plan . Of course you have your co-pay share to cover so nothing is completely covered . But as long as a medication is prescribed and you have Medicare part D or Advantage it 's covered .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Medicare is a federally structured health insurance program for a specific population segment . There are four different ` parts ' to Medicare ; Part A , Part B , Part C and Part D . In the simplest terms , Part A deals with inpatient costs and typically is provided without additional cost to the beneficiary . Part B deals with the costs related with doctors and typically has a premium related to it . Part D is prescription drug coverage that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulation and has premiums associated . Part C is the Medicare Advantage you ask about . This is an insurance product that is administered through private health insurers under strict regulations through Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- and covers the same expenses as Parts A and B . In order to qualify for Medicare Advantage , you must be enrolled in both Medicare Part A and B. Medicare Advantage does not replace your Part A and B , instead it administers your health care under the guidance of CMS . All Medicare Advantage plans are required to provide at a minimum the same coverage as Original Medicare -LRB- Part A and B -RRB- , but most plans offer additional benefits . Many Medicare Advantage plans also offer prescription drug coverage -LRB- Part D -RRB- , some do not . Some Medicare Advantage plans have zero premium , some have premiums .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Costco Offer Health Insurance ?
I do n't work for Costco , but I imagine they offer group health insurance to their employees . Costco is not an insurance company and therefore does not openly sell individual health insurance policies to their customers . If you 're an individual looking for health insurance , you should consult with an independent insurance broker to find a health plan that 's right for you .
I do n't work for Costco , but I imagine they offer group health insurance to their employees . Costco is not an insurance company and therefore does not openly sell individual health insurance policies to their customers . If you 're an individual looking for health insurance , you should consult with an independent insurance broker to find a health plan that 's right for you .
That 's funny ... I DID FIND that medication `` covered '' by a Part D Plan ... in my state ... Here is what you need to do . Go to medicare dot gov. Then click on `` Find Health and drug plans . >> > Add your Zip code >> > I usually check both of the `` I do n't know '' buttons . Just gets you through faster >> > Type in your drug name & pick the dosage . The system will default to the most common dosage/quantity >> > I chose 3 plan in my area ... ONE of the 3 DOES cover the Rx . Tier 3 level . The other two said not on formulary >> > I then popped over to Costco . You can see the cost of many medications right from their website . Not all drugs . They only list like the most prescribed . It 's a GREAT tool for comparing prices . AAHHH . I see that it is cheaper to just walk in to Costco -LRB- or mail order or go to Sam 's / BJ 's or price compare with a local pharmacy -RRB- . SO THE ANSWER IS >> > Yes . There could be a Part D that `` covers '' Cialis . You have to look at plans in YOUR area . Yet , I would like to ask a different question . IS IT WORTH having a plan that `` covers '' Cialis ? Based on the math alone ... . NO . I would n't advise it . Looks like you can buy it cheaper without `` coverage '' AND why would you want the cost to get you closer to the donut hole ? If the Rx is `` covered '' , it counts ... putting you closer & closer to the gap . YIKES !! You might need the coverage for something lifesaving one day . Shop around & get a better deal .
I believe Costco does sell some health and life insurance in a few states through Aetna and Manufactures Life Insurance Co. . These have lower face amounts and lower terms like 5 to 10 years . I recommend if you need term life insurance use an experienced independent life insurance broker who can shop many companies to find the best term life at the best price for your unique situation . Be careful with one size fits all plans .
As Peggy indicated , Medicare Part B does not cover incontinence diapers . This means there are no discounts , even if you purchase from a Medicare approved DME provider that accepts assignment . Many retailers such as Target and Walmart will carrier adult diapers and have good pricing . You should also consider warehouse clubs such as Costco and Sams as well as online retailers including Amazon .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
Some will and some wo n't . Employer 's offer health insurance and other benefits to attract and retain quality employees , reduce turnover and to reduce absenteeism . Also , many employer 's feel a moral obligation to offer health insurance and employer sponsored health insurance is a deductible business expense so it does offer tax advantages . That said , with the introduction of the health insurance marketplaces and advanced premium tax subsidies for individual health insurance under Obamacare , these have added a new consideration for some employers . Depending upon the overall income levels of a particular employer 's workforce -LRB- a business with a lot of low to moderate income employees -RRB- it is possible that offering group health insurance could now be a disadvantage to many employees . This is because they may qualify for premium subsidies in the government marketplaces that actually make the cost of insurance less for them than having it provided by their employer . This is a very complicated issue that has a unique answer for each employer . If you would like an analysis of whether offering or continuing to offer group health insurance is right for your workforce please feel free to contact me .
As of today no one has to offer health insurance ! That will change on January 1 , 2015 when employers with 100 or more employees will have to offer health insurance to their employees or pay a penalty -LRB- tax -RRB- . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- requires employers to offer health insurance to employees and dependents that are children but does not require employers to offer health insurance to spouses of employees . On January 1 , 2016 employers with 50-99 employers will be required to offer health insurance .
Yes . Absent a collective bargaining agreement with a labor union , which are increasingly rare , an employer makes a voluntary decision to offer health insurance and other benefits to their employees . There has never been a legal requirement in our nation for an employer to offer health insurance to their employees . The Affordable Care Act contains provisions that can apply tax penalties to employers above certain group sizes for not offering health insurance or the approved level of coverage and it offers inducements in the form of tax credits to smaller employers to provide health insurancebut even this law does not force an employer to provide health insurance to their employees . So , generally speaking , an employer is free to not offer health insurance to their employees or to terminate an existing group health insurance plan that they have had in effect . Indeed , the higher costs imposed by the requirements of the Affordable Care Act have already had the perverse effect of pushing some employers to the decision to cancel their group health plans .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Does health insurance make you healthier ? You could support the idea that it does . Most plans now have provisions that check ups and shots are covered at 100 % or with a nominal copay . Some employers have plans that offer health club memberships , discounts on bicycle helmets and other activity oriented things . Others offer cash incentives for improved health through the health plan . So through coverage and incentives health insurance can make you healthier .
No , Metlife does not offer health insurance . The Metlife.com website does have a helpful page explaining what health insurance is , and tips on how to pick a good health insurance plan . The main insurance plans that Metlife offers are life insurance , disability insurance , home insurance , and auto insurance .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- does not cover YMCA or gym membership . Some Medicare Supplements and Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- does provide gym memberships to their clients . SIlversneakers is a popular program offered by companies that sell Medicare Advantage and Medicare Supplement Plans . When selecting a plan evaluate the premium you are paying with the benefits the plan provides , do not base your decision on whether they offer a gym membership . Premiums vary considerably between companies that offer these plans . You may save more than enough to buy a gym membership by purchasing a plan that does not offer one because the premium cost much less .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How Much Does Disability Insurance Cost ?
Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . This is a very important type of coverage to have that many do n't think about and not something you want to be cheap about . It protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work . If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is the DEFINITION OF DISABILITY . Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It truly depends on a few factors . First , the general health of the applicant affects the rating received . Also , the type of work the applicant does also has bearing on what type of coverage can be offered at separate price points . Third , the lenth of time that benefits would be guaranteed comes into play , along with how much of a benefit per month is being sought . Now , different companies weigh all these factors in different ways -LRB- according to what their in-house actuaries conjure up as risk/reward decision points -RRB- , and as such there could very well be a `` band '' of prices offered by different companies for the same person and same set of factors .
Some financial planners recommend spending no more than 1-3 % of your income on Disability Insurance . The cost of Disability Insurance does depend on your age and health , though , and those who are older or have signs of worsening health may have a legitimate need to spend more than the recommended amount .
Disability insurance costs are based on your annual compensation you want to cover . It is also determined by your gender , age , smoking status , health history and your current medical condition . Other personal items that factor in the premium you 'll pay is vocational hazards , recreational activities and motor vehicle violations . You may pay between 3 and 5 % of your covered annual compensation .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
How to choose disability insurance ? Well , first thing you check before rates and dollars paid out is the `` definition '' of disability . This is the only thing that matters as if you do not meet the definition of disability the policy will not pay out . The next is how long does the duration of the definition of disability last ? Is it different durations for different disabilities ? A policy is only as good as the definitions it pays from . Words are so very important with disability insurance . Unlike life insurance where death pretty much determines the payout , disability has to meet a definition within the policy to be paid out .
-- > Normal 0 How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? I doubt anyone can give you the correct answer because the cost to rebuild your home will vary considerably depending on how it is damaged . If your home is the only one damaged in your area , for instance a fire in the home , the cost to rebuild will be one number . And if a number of homes in your area are damaged or destroyed , for instance a storm or wild fire , the cost to rebuild could be significantly more as materials , labor and contractors may be in short supply and cost much more . So how does one address that possibility ? Some , not all , insurance companies offer a Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost feature that can be added to your policy . Under this feature , you are required to purchase an amount of insurance consistent with the current cost to rebuild your home at normal prices . If your home needs to be rebuilt following a loss , the amount of insurance will automatically increase to whatever you need to rebuild the same home you had before the loss . That is the only way I know of to always buy the right amount of insurance , get one that adjusts to changing loss conditions . Otherwise , its just a guessing game and if you are wrong , you lose , not the insurance company .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most carriers will only issue a policy for a face amount equal to or less than the amount of coverage you have on your spouse . So you 've got to think about how much coverage your spouse has , what debts you need/want paid off , do you need it for income replacement , . etc. . Many people think that if their spouse does not produce an income , then they do not need coverage . This is the wrong way to look at it . Just because a spouse may be a stay-at-home mom or dad , does n't mean they do n't need coverage . In many homes , a stay-at-home spouse often maintains the house , the yard , buys the groceries , cooks , etc. . If the spouse passed away , would you do these tasks ? Or would you pay to have someone else do them ? Are you going to do them yourself ? All of these factor into the decisions . In short , while a stay-at-home spouse may not generate income , he/she may greatly reduce personal expenses . How much does that total up to over a given number of years ? It 's helpful to consult with an experienced broker who can help you determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
When I talk to a potential client about life insurance I generally will have a 2 part discussion . The first is identifying how much insurance you need . Taking into account replacing income , the mortgage , credit cards and other debt such as student loans , etc. . Then we figure out the cost between a term or period of time you need the insurance for example , if you have kids in school at home which you probably should have more insurance than after they have moved out along with your long-term needs . At this point , we will know what the cost is . Can you afford this ? Does it make sense and fall in line with your budget ? The second part is taking your budget and determining how much you care afford of that total amount . The reason I use this approach is I believe it is important for you to know how much you need versus how much you can afford . That way you at least know the short-fall you have and can work to filling that gap if possible or make other adjustments which may allow you to afford more .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
In order to figure out how much Disability Insurance you should have , you need to understand that Disability Insurance is based on your current income . Depending on how much you make , you may qualify for up to 70 % of your gross income . This said , you need to understand what your need may be , how much you can afford within your budget and design the policy to cover any partial disability . Without knowing your specific situation , I would start with the maximum benefit , and go from there . If you need help looking at some quotes , do not hesitate to contact me or your local insurance broker . Thank you for the question .
When buying Disability insurance you need to consider how many years you want it to last , how many months you want to wait from incurring the disability until you receive the first payment -LRB- elimination period -RRB- , and how much of your income you want to replace . You need to consider features like whether it will pay if you are able to go back to work but not are not back up to your old wages -LRB- residual disability -RRB- , whether it will pay if you can not perform your own occupation , and whether it has a cost of living rider . Finally , you need to consider your budget and how much of the above you can afford , then pick out the features that are most important to you .
How to shop for long term disability care insurance ? First start with a group of companies to compare from . Then READ the plans . The most important anything in a disability policy is the definition of what is disability . It does n't matter how long or how much if you never met the definition of disability stated inside the policy . The cheapest premiums with the highest payouts mean nothing if you never meet the policy 's definition .
Yes . Many individuals will set up a short term disability policy as well as a long-term disability policy to cover different types of scenarios -LRB- e.g. if you become permanently disabled vs. being temporarily disabled -RRB- . Some individuals will have a group DI policy through an employer and supplement it with an individual DI policy if they feel the group DI does n't provide enough benefits or a very good `` definition of disability '' -LRB- the most important factor with DI coverage -RRB- - when buying disability insurance , make sure of -LRB- and understand -RRB- the definition of disability that 's being cited in the program -LRB- own occupation , modified , or gainful - this is the most important factor in your disability policy as it will determine if you are eligible for a claim when something happens -RRB- . Please note , disability insurance policies coordinate benefits so there 's a limit to how much coverage and what kind you can secure -LRB- most carriers will keep it to a maximum of 70 % of income - the percentage can vary by insurance company -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help setting up coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How To Get Cheap Car Insurance At 17 ?
Need cheap car insurance at age 17 ? One of the most important things to do is to shop and compare different rates from multiple carriers . Prices can vary by as much as 50 % , depending on the insurer that you are using . Utilize all discounts , including good student , multi-policy and any other offered reductions . A broker will handle all of this for you at no cost . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated auto insurance websites .
The way to get cheap auto insurance at age 18 might vary by your state . In California it would help if you were a part of a household with other drivers who have a good driving record . It will help a great deal if you are at least a B student , carrying a full load . It would help if your driving record was spotless . It would help if your household had other lines of insurance with the same carrier , there might be several multi-line discounts available . Different insurers might offer additional discounts . Finally , it might help if you were assigned to an older car and accepted only PL/PD coverage on that vehicle .
Need cheap car insurance at age 17 ? One of the most important things to do is to shop and compare different rates from multiple carriers . Prices can vary by as much as 50 % , depending on the insurer that you are using . Utilize all discounts , including good student , multi-policy and any other offered reductions . A broker will handle all of this for you at no cost . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated auto insurance websites .
This one 's pretty simple if you have a good agent with a well trained staff . Simply call them up and tell them you 're replacing a car . To make sure they have everything they need have this information : Year , make and model of new car Full 17 digit VIN When you got your new car When you got rid of your old car Talk about the coverage you want : Comp & Collision ? Deductibles Anything special added to the car If it 's financed or leased , they 'll need to know the name , address , and loan or lease number of the finance or leasing company How you 'd like to receive your certificate of insurance Also at this time , it might be a good idea to ask what the premiums will be so you can budget for it . If you have n't sold your old car yet , do n't take the coverage off it . This is important . If you let someone test drive your car and they get in an accident or hurt someone , you want to be sure your covered . The premium you 'll pay for that short period of time is worth it .
Not really ... It all depends on the carrier you are with , but with our carriers we do n't see a significant price break at age 18 . We see a more significant break in the mid 20 's . Many carriers consider those that are 18 , 19 or in the eraly 20 's and still being `` young '' drivers and price them accordingly . Every year you get further away from the true young driver age of 16 or 17 , you get a little help onthe pricing but its not generally a lot to get excited about . Contact your local independant agent and have them run some pricing comaprisons for with different companies . If you are 17 now , ask them to run estimates on what your premiums -LRB- at today 's rates -RRB- may look like as you get older .
Great Question . You will need to provide your personal and vehicleinformation such as : Your full name Driver 's license number & expiration date . Possibly your social security number depending on what state you live in . date of birth address of where the car is located and mailing address if different vehicle information such as Year , Make , Model , & V.I.N which is a 17 digit number Is the vehicle garaged or not ? How is the vehicle used ? How many miles are currently on the vehicle and how many miles to you drive on an annual basis ? Names of any possible drivers or people living with you along with their personal information if they wish to drive the vehicle . Need to know who your current insurance is with or if you have had coverage in the past You will need to determine how much coverage you need in place and what deductibles you would be comfortable having in place . There are probably a few more questions that you would need to answer prior to binding coverage , but that is a quick list of information you should have handy when you are ready to pursue auto insurance quotations . I hope this helps and have a wondeful day . Best , Josh DeBoer Producer Fred Daniel & Sons , Inc
There is no set cost for adding a car to your existing auto insurance policy . Many factors come into play such as the value of the car , desired coverage limits , historical claims costs for the particular vehicle , historical claims frequency of the particular car , safety and anti-theft features . A quick call into your insurance professional , preferably with the 17-digit vehicle identification number , can get you the added cost in seconds .
In Minnesota , none of the standard insurers will write stand alone health coverage on a 17 year old . However , the Minnesota Comprehensive Health Association - which has long been in existencespecificallyto provide real health insurance coverage for those who can not obtain it in the standard market - would accept the 17 year old .
Let me start by saying that Medigap isnt the same as Part B but lets get a better understanding of how Medicare works . If you look at page 17 of the 2015 Medicare and You book you will see there are 2 main choices on how you can get your Medicare coverage . There is Original Medicare that includes Part A and B with the option to fill in the gaps in Original Medicare by buying a Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Or there is Medicare Advantage Plan , Part C , which include Part A , Part B and in most cases Part D. On page 92 of the Medicare and You book you will find that all Medigap policies are standardized . All polices offer that same basic benefits but different insurance companies may charge you different premiums for the same exact policy . Its a good idea to use a good broker that represents multi companies that can show you not only the price difference but also the average rate increases because all Medigap policies go up every year . Now there are different Medigap plans A-N , the easiest way to think about this is like car insurance . You can buy a car insurance policy with no deductible but by doing so your premium will be higher . If you choose to assume some of the risk , buying a policy with a deductible your premium will be lower . As long as youre in fairly good health -LRB- no major illnesses or recent hospitalization with in the last 2 years -RRB- you can show the market for the lowest price , remember Medigap plans always have a price increase each year and its always a wise decision to shop around every couple of years to find the best price . I am aware of one insurance company that once you are approved , will allow you to change between plans without re-looking at your current health , which may be a viable option if you want to save money with a higher deductible while you are in good health and then when your health starts to change you change your plan to a lower deductible . If you have any other question feel free to contact me for a phone review or we can chat on Skype .
This is not always the case there are some carriers that actually give you young driver discount and also if you have good grades that help . The main reason it is higher is because you are less experienced driver and are more likely to have an accident but there are many factors for this . Also the type of car you drive makes a difference also . I insure a 17 yr old who is on her own policy and has had tickets and drives a 2 door car and with just liability is only $ 160 a month that is not a bad rate as here inMontana the average young driver you can figures is 100 a month before you even think about adding a car this is being added to another policy . My recommendations are to talk to a local agent and see what type of discounts they offer for younger drivers and if you are being listed on another persons policy or not .
Teen drivers are among the most expensive to insure , because they have the most tickets and accidents . A 17 year old can reduce her auto insurance by 1 -RRB- comparing prices , 2 -RRB- buying an older car that does not need comprehensive and collision -LRB- full coverage -RRB- , and 3 -RRB- by driving fewer miles in a year . Some kinds of cars are more dangerous and therefore more expensive to insure , so make sure you check insurance rates before you purchase a vehicle . A teen driver may also be excluded from having an insurance policy on his own , so it usually makes sense to join a family policy . You would also want to take advantage of any multi-car or multi-line discounts offered by your insurance company . These would be the same way that any driver can reduce her insurance rates , but for the teen driver it is particularly important to follow these steps . In addition , a clean driving record is paramount . So drive carefully and those rates will go down over time .
The easy answer for this would be `` Anyone you give permission to drive your vehicle . '' The exception to this would be anyone who is specifically excluded from your insurance policy . For example , a client of mine has a 17 year old son . Their son had a valid learners permit and went through the process of completing Drivers Ed , but never took the final exam and was never issued a license . Even though his permit has expired , based on his age and the fact that he had a permit , I recommended to my client they included him on their policy , but list him as an excluded driver . Because he is excluded , the insurance company does not rate him on the policy , and the premium did not increase . Outside of their son , anyone they give permission to drive their car would be covered , even if the person who borrowed the vehicle did not have their own insurance policy . You do run the risk of increased monthly premium payments should an uninsured driver borrow your car with your permission and be involved in an accident where they are liable however . So be careful of who and how often you do lend your vehicle out .
It is hard to answer specifically , but safe to say that a 17 year old wil pay more than a 37 year old insuring the same bike , the same way with the same driving history . Similar to car insurance , a younger , less experienced bikler will gelerally pay more than an older more experienced one .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
This question has several answers . From a financial planning perspective , the answer is thatyou would n't . The adverse financial impact of the death of a child is relatively small . While a terrible tragedy and an absolutely awful thing to go through , technically no one financially depends on them for support . So , one of the basic tenets of life insurance - to provide lost income due to premature death of a family bread-winner - buying life insurance on a child does not make sense . While children might not need life insurance , here are some reasons why one might want to buy it on them anyway : 1 . Insure the child 's insurability - this can be achieved by purchasing a small face amount of permanent life insurance -LRB- I would recommend participating whole life -RRB- with a guaranteed future purchase option rider . The rider insures that the insured can purchase additional life insurance without the need to medically qualify . If the adult child 's health goes south , additional life insurance can be purchased . Drawbacks : a -RRB- the option usually runs out at 40 or so years old ; b -RRB- typically , only the same type of life insurance can be purchased -LRB- which can be a lot more expensive at age 30 than at age 3 -RRB- , and c -RRB- if you do n't exercise the option , you lose it . Oh , and by the way , the insured usually assumes ownership of the policy at 18 , at which time , that income-tax-free cash value can be mighty handy for the down payment on that new car . So long , insurance policy , we hardly got to know you . 2 . Provide a source of money with tax-favored access privileges - This is n't likely to work -LRB- see `` new car '' above -RRB- , but if protected by a trust with strict limits on how the cash values may be used and under what conditions it must be paid back , it could allowa responsibleadult child to be his/her own bank and/or have at least somewhere to go , independently , to cover an emergency need . The problem is that even a trust can be gotten around and the cash - and the life insurance benefit it supports - is more likely to end up being spent - and lapsed . 3 . If one feels that the death of a child could seriously impact them financially , I recommend purchasing a child rider -LRB- usually comes in `` units '' , 1 unit = $ 1000 coverage -RRB- on a parent 's term or permanent policy . Twenty-five to fifty-units should be plenty to cover final expenses and maybe some medical bills not covered by medical insurance . Using life insurance to help fund college is not the best use of the money spent over the years . There are now too many other tax-favored savings vehicles that do n't include the cost of insurance to depend on a life policy to provide a significant amount of cash over a 16 or 17 year investment horizon . In the event of the death of one child , the insurance money received as a death benefit could go to help provide some start-up college money for another child in the family -LRB- # 3 would be the least expensive way for that to happen -RRB- , but that 's kind of creepy . I think # 1 is the only prudent reason to buy insurance on a child and then only when there is a family history of childhood or adult onset of some kind of genetic malady like diabetes or cardiac problems . Otherwise , # 3 might make you feel better , but it 's not likely to be needed .
First , speaking from personal experience , my son committed suicide @ age 17 . The benefit paid for funeral costs and time away from work which is more than you might think . Second , you can get as much as $ 50k for $ 4 per month which is a great gift of life to provide to your children when they become adults . Keeping this simple , no one depends on a baby so be sure to have adequate coverage on yourself as the parents . Let me know if you have any questions .
Life Insurance is usually designed based on need . The recovery or protection against a lost asset or income , preservation of your estate from taxes , etc. . The need for children to have life insurance falls into 2 categories : burial expenses ... I recently lost my son , 17 , which we had coverage on him as a child rider , $ 10k which paid for the service/cremation , and the lost income from a month out of work . As a gift . As the cost of insurance is low for children , you can set up a life insurance policy designed to build cash value to use later in life . You not only have the benefit of the death benefit , but more so the benefit of using the life insurance as an asset to draw from in the future . With the compounding you get , the growth can be substantial if designed correctly .
People who participate in high risk activities or have impaired health conditions often are charged much higher premiums for life insurance , whether they are applying for term or permanent coverage . The price that you pay is determined by your age , the requested amount of coverage , and risk classification . If the carrier offers a substandard/table-rating for the coverage , the premiums will usually be based off of the standard risk class with an extra 25 % increase for each extra letter assigned -LRB- the 25 % figure can vary by carrier - e.g. some may use 17 % , etc. -RRB- . For example , a Table B rating would cost the standard rate plus 50 % -LRB- B = 2 tables -RRB- , a Table D rating would cost double the standard rate -LRB- D = 4 tables -RRB- , etc. . Insurance companies may also look at assigning a flat extra rating with a specified cost per thousand dollars of insurance -LRB- such as $ 5.00 per $ 1,000 of coverage -RRB- . Flat extras may be applied for only a few years , or for the life of the policy and are more commonly assigned for high-risk activities . Table-ratings are more commonly given for high-risk health conditions . I often also see many people just apply for a bunch of companies at the same time because they 're a high-risk individual . DO NOT do this ! . Applying for coverage with more than one company at the same time could hurt your chances of securing a policy . It is in your best interest to find out before applying what the most likely offer will be from 10-15 different companies so that you know what to expect and know that you are getting the best possible offer . I highly recommend working with an independent agent who can look at multiple companies for you - trying to get that information can be very difficult to do on your own . This is the exact field my group specializes in and would be happy to be of assistance with your program .
Term life insurance is in force for the contractual guaranteed period . Most term life insurance can be purchased in five year increments like 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years . There are a few term life insurance companies the offer a customization option like 17 years instead of the traditional 15 or 20 year guaranteed periods .
In most states a 17 year old individual can not obtain health insurance on their own . They can be added as a dependent to their parents plan . A few states do offer `` child only '' health insurance plans but most do n't . Prior to Obamacare any child under 19 could have their own policy .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Add A Non Family Member To My Car Insurance ?
That is going to depend on the carrier that you are applying for auto coverage with . Many carriers would prefer that other drivers in the household that are not directly related have their own insurance policy , but some will accept other drivers being on the same policy even if they are not related as long as they reside in the same premise as the insured . Contact a local agent to find out about coverage availability and pricing in your area .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
People with many forms of mental illness can get life insurance . Bear in mind that this term can cover a wide range of impairments . I know firsthand that many of them are insurable . A lot of it boils down to the need for the life insurance . Almost anybody can qualify for a burial policy . Depending on the age of the insured , and the state of residence , a number of small policies could be available . Wont cost too much , and gets the job done . But what if you need more substantial coverage ? For example , I worked with a family who had an adult son who is mentally retarded . He was reasonably self-sufficient . He actually worked for his father part-time , and did missionary work first church . He had the skills and personality to go door-to-door and spread his gospel . The insurance company gave us money for not just final expenses , but then some for the family . There was a co-dependence there that was insurable . You can see that people who are mentally ill can establish themselves as a valued member of the group . The members of the group therefore have an insurable interest in them , and deserve money to compensate for their loss . And this could include people with many other impairments . Autism , depression , severe anxiety , PTSD . ADD . OCD . People with any and all of these can be fairly high functioning , and therefore insurable . Dont forget one other important item : planning for people with special needs . Folks with impairments can be functional , but can also remain dependent on their family members . What if those family members die ? Life insurance is needed on on the parents , or responsible siblings , so that the dependent family member can remain self-sufficient . Now , with regard to the choice of carrier : there is not a hot list of companies that take people with mental illness . Potential applicants need to be prequalified to identify the carrier with the most interest in this particular case at this particular time . And that could change from quarter to quarter , or from year-to-year . It is the job of the broker to know which companies like which types of cases .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
First , let me say I am not an accountant or tax expert at all . This questions would be best answered by a Certified Public Account or other tax pro . I can only speak to my personal situation . For years we did n't have a group plan through my company and I had individual/familycoverage that I paid for out of pocket . I also have family members who have some health issues that included specialists , a lot of RX drugs , etc. . Simply due to the cost of the health coverage , we had to go with a high deductible health plan as well . So , over the course of a year we would have our health premiums , high deductibles , plus a bunch of specialist costs that were not even covered by our insurance . This generated a ton of dollars that came out of my pocket personally . There is a threshold for medical expences -LRB- I do n't remember what it is -RRB- where anything over an above that figure is deductible on your tax return . I have been well over that figure every year for the last 5 or 6 , so I have been able to deduct a good amount of my out of pocket expence . This is just my personal situation and again , I am not a tax professional of any sort . All this was done on the advice of my personal accountant . I would highly recomend you contact a tax professional and discuss your individual situation with them .
This depends upon your state and your insurance carrier . I will first speak generally then about the Michigan rules . General : anyone who is a family member and living in your home is covered by your auto insurance . Anyone who is borrowing your car with your permission is covered . Those are the major general coverage . Michigan : no-fault insurance goes like this 1 . owner of the car , 2 . driver of the car , 3 . someone in the car , 4 . a household family member who has no-fault . The general trend in Michigan is to find someone with insurance and make a claim against it , to prevent a mini-tort . I hope this helps .
Let me add one other use for Non Owned liability coverage . You work in an occupation where the owner of the business is also the owner of the vehicle you use on a regular basis . Non owned vehicle coverage can play an important role in protecting you . Keep in mind that your employer buys coverage to protect his/her interest not yours . If you own an auto , and are faced with an employer providing basic coverage then it is called Extended Non Owned Liability coverage . If you do not own any car then it is referred to as Non Owned Liability Coverage -LRB- not Extended at that point -RRB- Non owned coverage can be a very valuable way of protecting you , your family or guest passengers in your car . Most large employers are not concerned with Uninsured Motorist or Underinsured Motorist Coverage . But you should be . In about 14 % of all wrecks the adverse driver who causes the wreck will have no insurance . so now you need the protection of uninsured and under insured motorist coverage which is not something your employer worries about -LRB- its your life not his or hers -RRB- so , be sure you buy a non owned liability policy in these circumstances and match the UM and UIM limits with your liability limit of coverage
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
A cancer insurance policy can be a good addition to your insurance portfolio . Even though it is inexpensive , you should have proper health , life and disability insurance before you consider a cancer insurance policy . Cancer treatment usually brings unanticipated expenses . Even if you have excellent health insurance coverage , there are many ancillary costs not covered by other insurance . Treatment usually involves a lot of driving back and forth to doctors , hospitals and radiology centers , significantly increasing auto and transportation expenses . A family member may lose time at work to be a caregiver . A slew of little expenses that add up to a significant burden for many cancer survivors . If you or a family member are ever diagnosed with cancer you will be thankful you bought the policy .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
All drivers on your car insurance policy have to be listed ... although not necessarily rated . For example , all family members that are licensed , and live in the household , typically must be rated . That is , they are assigned to a specific vehicle as a principle or occasional driver . Of course , they can usually drive any insured vehicle in the household . `` Family '' car policies are quite prevalent , and offer very flexible coverage . Occasionally , a driver that is a full-time household member has their own car and their own insurance policy . In these situations , although they may be listed on the family policy , that person and their vehicle are not charged . However , if the insurance lapses on that vehicle , then it is possible that they will subsequently have to be rated on the main family policy . Important : This answer was provided by Edward Harris , one of the leading US authorities on auto insurance rates , and the owner of Carinsurancezoom.org , the premier trusted website for obtaining the lowest auto insurance prices in all states .
Many family members and professional associates are eligible . Interestingly , I find that the majority of my clients designate a brother or sister as the trustee . That makes sense . After all , people tend to trust a close family member on life-and-death issues . When the insured is no longer around , a trustworthy soul is needed to handle the money . And also to take care of surviving family members . Siblings fit the bill . But it must be emphasized that trustees have a huge responsibility with regards to the policy inside the trust . They really need to make sure that it is audited on a regular basis to confirm it is performing as expected . You know how people sometimes lose track of their life insurance ? How sometimes it doesnt perform according to projections , and additional premium payments are needed ? Or it runs out of cash sooner than expected ? Or the death benefit gets reduced ? Well , if you are the trustee of your brother or sisters life insurance trust , you dont want any of this to happen . You very well could be liable . The insured set up the trust with a strategy designed to provide a certain amount of cash to certain people at certain times . Your job is to make sure the train arrives on schedule . If , for whatever reason , that policy under-performs , the buck could very well stop with you . You do not want that hot potato , both for financial as well as family reasons . You dont want to let the people down whom your sibling trusted you to help . So , if you are the trustee , make sure that policy is audited on a yearly basis , and make any changes that are necessary .
USAA is a highly rated insurance company and I am sure anything they offer will be of high quality but you need to make sure that policy meets your needs . How do you do that ? Sit down with your significant other and write down what it is that you want the policy to provide . Then call the company and say , I want a health insurance plan that will pay 80 % of all charges in the event I am hosiptialized with a $ 500 deductible . I want the policy to allow each member of my family to go the doctor up to 4 times a year and only have to pay a $ 30 copay . I want that policy to pay 80 % of any prescriptions that I or my family memebers need to purchase . Do you have a policy that meets my expectations and if so what do it cost ?
To really get an answer , you need to ask yourself ` What happens to my family and beneficiaries if I die tomorrow ? ' . If there are family members and other beneficiaries that depend on you financially , the answer should be clear ; Any death benefit that they receive willnot replace the void from your passing but it will certainly help reduce the burden of any financial obligations that you had been helping to cover , i.e. mortgage , car payments , debt , student loans , living expenses and the list can go on . Further , life insurance can help you leave a legacy or gift for your loved ones that can help them for years to come . And if there are beneficiaries that you would desire to leave money for , you can always name a non-profit or charity as a beneficiary , i.e. Alma matter , favorite charitable organization , museum , zoo , etc. . Insurance proceeds , which are tax-free , can be used to fund education for children and grandchildren , family trip to help heal together after the loss of your life , remove financial uncertainty about a spouse or child 's retirement or an endless list of other possibilities . It is an invaluable gift over and above the sum of money that they could receive . The bottom line is , whatever you can comfortably afford in premiums , will create a larger sum of money that will help change your beneficiaries and loved ones ' lives for the better .
First of all , I hope everyone is ok from the accident . Well , there are a few questions that you need to ask and you need to take a look at the auto policy . How long has your grandson been living with you?Take a look at the policy to see ifyour grandson 's name listed on the policy as a named insured . Here is how `` you and `` your '' is defined in the policy : 1 . Those named in the declarations , and 2 . The spouse of the person -LRB- s -RRB- named , if they are a resident of the SAME household a. Living in the same household as `` You '' , or if not living in the same household as `` You '' , he or she isconsidered `` You '' unitl the earlier of : 1 . 90 days after a change in residency 2 . The effective date of securing his or her own coverage 3 . The date the policy expires A `` Family member '' is defined : 1 . A resident of your household who is : a.related to you by blood , marriage , or adoption b. is a ward or foster child . Now thatyour grandson lives with you , the insurance company is wanting to add him to your insurancebecausehe is a `` Family Member '' of your householdand not his step fathers.You need to discuss what you would like to happen with your current agent . The insurance company may offer a solution and have you sign a driver exclusion form that would specifically exclude your grandson from your policy .
HMO 's cover the same medical services that traditional major medical insurance plans , either group or individual cover . The essential difference is in the provider network used to deliver these benefits and how the subscriber 's access to their benefits is guided by this approach . HMO stands for Health Maintenance Organization and while there are variations on the theme , in its purest form an HMO has an exclusive network of contracted providers that must be used by subscribers to the HMO in order to receive covered services . In this context an HMO would not pay for services a member receives from a non-HMO provider . Also , HMO 's often use a `` gatekeeper '' approach that requires a referral from a Primary Care Physician before the member can receive care from a specialist or other HMO provider for non-emergency services . Theoretically the HMO concept assures that your Primary Care Physician is overseeing the member 's complete range of health care services and treatment , makes sure that care is being delivered in the most appropriate and cost effective setting and manner , and maximizes the overall efficiency of the delivery of health care to its members . In practical terms the HMO concept has generally fared best in higher population density areas that have an extensive and competitive medical infrastructure in place . One of the main reasons for this is that the HMO providers can actually be employees of the HMO or have negotiated deep discounts for their services with the HMO in exchange for a high volume of patient traffic . Accomplishing this in a metropolitan area like Los Angeles is far easier than in a rural area where there may be not be many competing providers and hospitals and these providersare already serving virtually all of the area 's population . Also , the more restrictive and controlling nature of the HMO concept has not always been welcomed by the American consumer who has been accustomed to making their own choices when it comes to selecting their doctors , hospitals and pharmacies and having a high degree of freedom in when and where they access the health care system . While HMOs can deliver excellent benefits and services at attractive rates , the potential consumer should also consider the trade offs involved in achieving these ends . If the consumer finds the HMO network to be sufficient for their perceived needs and understands therules of being an HMO member it can be a very positive environment in which to receive one 's health care . Going into an HMO without understanding and accepting these factors can lead to a very unsatisfactory and perhaps costly experience .
If you are lucky enough to work for an employer who pays 100 % of the employee rate for the group health insurance they offer -LRB- pretty rare these days -RRB- then standard group contracts require all eligible employees to be enrolled . So , in that circumstance you might get health insurance coverage whether you want it or not . If you have to contribute towards the cost of the health insurance provided by your employer then you have the right to waive participating in your employer 's group health plan . I will presume , though , that your question is really about the `` Individual Mandate '' provision of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and its requirement starting on January 1 , 2014 that a person have health insurance coverage that meets the minimum essential benefit requirements under the law or be subject to the `` Shared Responsibility Payment '' -LRB- does n't that sound better than tax penalty ? -RRB- on your income taxes . ObamaCare does give you the choice of either getting health insurance coverage or going without coverage and potentially being subject to a tax penalty . In that sense you can opt out of having health insurance coverage . But wait there 's more ! The Affordable Care Act provides for persons in certain situations or who are members of certain groups to be exempt from the individual mandate requirement . Some examples are ; 1 -RRB- If the cost of coverage for you is more than 8 % of your annual household income 2 -RRB- If your annual income is below the threshold where you have to file personal income taxes 3 -RRB- If you qualify for a `` hardship '' exemption -LRB- this can be an escape route for many people -RRB- 4 -RRB- If you have had a gap in being covered of less than 3 months during the tax year 5 -RRB- Members of religious groups that object to coverage on religious grounds 6 -RRB- Members of non-profit religious organizations where members share costs 7 -RRB- Prison inmates 8 -RRB- Non U.S. citizens 9 -RRB- Native American tribe members 10 -RRB- Year long residents of U.S. territories such as Puerto Rico and Guam What could be more simple ? I hope this helps answer your question .
No , your Brother can not add you onto his health insurance plan . Unless , for some reason he claims you as his dependent on his taxes . If that 's the case he will be able to add you . T The rule of thumb is that as long as you claim another family member on your taxes then you can all be on the same health insurance plan .
There are definitely some questions you need to ask whenever you are shopping for life insurance . The answers to these questions should help you to consider which direction to take in your purchase ; 1 -RRB- Begin with telling the agent exactly what you need the life insurance to do . This way you can let them know that you know what you are looking for and need guidance on the vehicle best suited to get you to your destination . 2 -RRB- Does this policy accumulate cash vale ? You may or may not have a need for cash value but you certainly want to know if it is building cash value up . 3 -RRB- How long can the insurance company contest this policy ? There is a period of time with insurance policies where they can be contested for accuracy in the information given at time of application . 4 -RRB- Does this policy carry any loan provisions ? Can you borrow against it ? 5 -RRB- Can I add riders to it for my family members instead of getting them separate policies ? 6 -RRB- What is your company 's claim paying status ? Does this company pay its claims in a timely fashion ? 7 -RRB- Who will be my agent ? Many agents only sell a policy and then disappear within a few months . If you have a problem with your policy there is no agent to help you and you are forced to deal strictly with customer service . If possible , always insist on having an agent .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can I Cash In My Life Insurance Policy ?
A policy owner may cancel life insurance . The coverage will cease . If it is a term policy , there is no cash value to cash in . Permanent life insurance may have a cash surrender value if it has been in force for a few years . If the policy has more cash surrender value than the cumulative net premiums paid in , the difference is gain which is subject to income tax .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
Life insurance is one of the investments that allows an individual to trade a low monthly ; payment for a life insurance policy that has a protection amount that is much higher than my monthly payment . If my monthly payment is $ 100 month and I have a policy of $ 500,000 do you consider that money well spent . The Life Insurance policy can aslo enable tax managment strategies if it is a `` cash value '' policy '' . The `` cash value '' builds and as long as I do not withdraw the earnings it is not taxable . So if I have had this policy for 18 years and my `` baby '' is now grown and driving my Subaru and needs money to go to college I can pull the cash value at intervals that allows me to minimize my consequences and my `` baby '' slides off to college . Is that a good `` investment vehicle '' ? Life Insurance also enables Estate Planning strategies enabling me to pass assets to my children without huge tax consequences .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
You should purchase life insurance when you feel it is appropriate . I purchased my first whole life policy when I was 18 years old . I wanted to pay for my final expenses , establish my insurability and I looked to the policy to help me save money in a disciplined manner . When I married , I increased my policy to provide for my brides needs should I die prematurely . I still buy life insurance and am contemplating an additional purchase .
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
First , let me say I am not an accountant or tax expert at all . This questions would be best answered by a Certified Public Account or other tax pro . I can only speak to my personal situation . For years we did n't have a group plan through my company and I had individual/familycoverage that I paid for out of pocket . I also have family members who have some health issues that included specialists , a lot of RX drugs , etc. . Simply due to the cost of the health coverage , we had to go with a high deductible health plan as well . So , over the course of a year we would have our health premiums , high deductibles , plus a bunch of specialist costs that were not even covered by our insurance . This generated a ton of dollars that came out of my pocket personally . There is a threshold for medical expences -LRB- I do n't remember what it is -RRB- where anything over an above that figure is deductible on your tax return . I have been well over that figure every year for the last 5 or 6 , so I have been able to deduct a good amount of my out of pocket expence . This is just my personal situation and again , I am not a tax professional of any sort . All this was done on the advice of my personal accountant . I would highly recomend you contact a tax professional and discuss your individual situation with them .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , `` How much life insurance is considered enough ? '' Well , I definitely want to cover all my indebtedness : mortgages , credit card , auto , home , all my debts that I may incur . I also want to look at future obligations ; maybe my children 's college education , my retirement or replacing my income if I 'm not there so that my spouse or business partners or beneficiaries are not saddled without any income coming in that I used to generate . So it 's really important . How much do I need ? I want to try to buy what I need to cover all those areas and then maybe a little bit more in case I have charitable intent . A lot of people have big hearts but small wallets and sometimes I add that on because people want to be able to give something in case something happens to them . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just send them to www.insurancelibrary.com
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The key word in this question is `` cover '' . All life insurance can be used toward that purpose if the beneficiary chooses to use it that way . Policies can be made with a Funeral Home as the beneficiary but only one kind of policy will answer the question of `` will it cover '' . When I first entered the insurance profession in 1957 we sold a $ 1,000 or $ 2,000 ordinary -LRB- permanent , whole -RRB- life policy for a person wanting funeral expense coverage . As I increased my knowledge in the insurance industry I went to including a `` Final Expense '' amount in the practice of total planning of a persons insurance needs . At that time we figured $ 10,000 sufficient to meet the needs of final hospital expenses , taxes , burial , etc. . It was not until I was Executive Vice President of a company that was sold to a company that wrote burial insurance policies through the funeral home . I became licensed with the new company and learned , at a much older age , that there is only one policy that can REALLY say it will cover funeral costs at the persons death . That policy is available through funeral homes , it is an increasing whole life policy that the funeral home accepts for the purchase of a funeral at a specific time and then guarantees to give that equivalent funeral whenever the person dies without any further cost except some expense that might be beyond those spelled out in the contract . I began to teach classes for CE on this kind of policy for our state and for many insurance agencies . This is a completely different policy that can be of great benefit to a local independent agent working with a local funeral home . As I began to teach about this type of Life Insurance I found most Life Insurance agents had never heard of it or had been sold against it by companies writing supposed , last expense , death benefit policies . I have now written this type of policy for almost 20 years and the families of the deceased have nothing but praise for a properly planned REAL Funeral Policy . At 81 years old the death benefit of my funeral policy now exceeds the death benefit of the first policy I bought for total family protection . If I am blessed with a few more years it may equal what I used to think was a huge Life Insurance policy . I am still writing these policies on my friends . I have learned one thing over the years ! In the insurance business never close your mind to a type of policy until you have totally studied it yourself rather than being sold a bill of goods by a company that may not have the policy you are trying to learn about . Worry about that client , first and foremost , and do the best job you possibly can for that individual by increasing your knowledge of this business . I have covered some of the aspects of this policy in my recently published second edition of `` The Prophets Dollar '' , available on Amazon .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Is Auto Insurance Rated ?
Auto insurance is rated based on many factors . Some of the more common factors are , geographic location , age , driving record , marital status , number of drivers in the household , and credit rating just to mention a few . When shopping for your auto insurance always remember price is n't everything . Use a local agent that you are comfortable with , remember they are going to be first and last line when it comes to a claim or assisting with your coverage .
In California auto insurance is rated by the year , make and model of the car . Another factor is the driving records of all the members of the household with the car . A major factor is the number of miles the vehicle travels . In California the insurance company does not do a credit check . The company will also check the intended use of the vehicle.c
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
This is a very hard questions to answer since each carrier from the next can vary so much . I have seen between different carriers as much as $ 1,000 difference for the same coverage . A classic example I will give one of my carriers that is a mutual carriers was only $ 1,000 a year with a $ 500 deductible based on a value of the home at $ 200,000 but the other national carrier was $ 1,400 with a $ 1,000 deductible based off of the same value . Also you have to consider are they rating the home with replacement cost or actual cash value both can make a HUGE difference in the rating factor . There are several ways carriers base rates not only the value of the home but what is your home built from is it a log home or stick frame home . Are you in a fire area or how far are you away from fire department . The best thing you can do is shop with a independent agent they can rate it with many carriers . Also Bundling is not always the route either many time the home can be an excellent rate but the autos are high even with the discount of having both policies with the same carrier . Example I have found in our agency is that I have a carrier that gives you a discount on your auto because you own a home but the home rate is outrageous but then I have a different carrier for the home that does n't sell auto insurance but they give you a discount on the home if you insure the auto in the same agency and the rate is much lower then if you placed them with the same carrier all in one package . the key is talk to an agent who can compare rates with many carriers and make sure your home is valued correctly .
The General is a nonstandard auto insurance company , so you should only consider The General if you do n't qualify for standard auto insurance , due to your driving record or other factors . Like with any auto insurance company , some drivers in some states or zip codes may find The General has the best price for them , but other people may find much lower rates with other nonstandard auto insurance companies . Compare The General with GEICO , Progressive , Infinity , andlocal independent insurance agents selling nonstandard auto insurance near you . Check your phone book : agents sellingnonstandard auto insurance usually advertise about insuring people with no prior insurance , needing SR-22s , or havingtickets and/or accidents .
Yes the internet is flooded with thousands of insurance companies , insurance brokers , agents offering auto insurance rates online . It just takes a few minutes and few clicks on the mouse . The best thing about getting auto insurance is the competition among the carriers . Because of such competition , many of them offer the cheapest auto insurance rates for you . Shopping for the best auto insurance rates on the internet allows you the option whether or not to talk to an agent as well . Make sure when online have your old policy ready so you can refer to it for some of the questions you will have to answer . When buying a policy online or offline make sure you fully disclose your driving record . In some States while youre at it , check your credit score . Some auto insurance companies will not run your driving record at the time of purchase but they will run it on the back end and once they find out about your driving history and your credit , your rates will increase . So do the research before you buy .
That will really depend on the carrier . Each carrier sets their own equations for how they arrive at your auto insurance premium . Your carrier may or may not have a price break built into their auto insurance rates that would affect your rate at the next renewal after your 20th birthday . I would suggest contacting your local agent or the carrier of your auto insurance coverage to ask them about the availability of a rate change at 20 years old .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
` Business Use ' is a rating classification -LRB- or used to be -RRB- used in rating a personal auto policy . Many personal auto insurance carriers in the past did not allow a ` business use ' classification on a pickup or van so a commercial autoor business auto policy had to be obtained for that vehicle . With the rating methods used by carriers today , it may be possible to insure a vehicle on a personal auto policy and use it for business purposes . The agent or broker providing the quote -LRB- s -RRB- should be able to advise you . If you are purchasing personal auto insurance online , you are acting as your own broker and good luck to you in obtaining the coverage you should have for such a situation .
How much is for car insurance ? Hmmm . What is this person attempting to ask ? How many people like auto insurance ? No , I think they mean something else . How much does it cost ? Yes , that 's probably it . Rates vary , depending on your age , location , driving record and vehicle . As experienced brokers , we 're always happy to shop for the best rates and show you the lowest prices . LIVE -LRB- 2014/2015 -RRB- Answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier US car insurance broker for 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites where consumers find the lowest available rates .
I 'll apologize first , but I have to disagree with Brandon . Auto insurance IS expensive in Michigan . As of 30 days ago , we have the second highest auto insurance rates in the country . This is kind of surprising if you compare the statutory coverage in Michigan . We have two things that drive up our costs . First we 're one of 26 no-fault states . Secondly , we 're the only state in the US that has unlimited lifetime personal injury protection . If you 're injured in a car accident in Michigan and you 're covered by an auto insurance policy , you 'll receive unlimited lifetime medical benefits as well as work loss benefits . I personally know people who have been injured in a car accident and been receiving medical care for over 25 years to the tune of over $ 5,000,000 . You 'd think we 'd have the highest rates in the country . Now , just because the average rates here are higher than some other states does n't mean YOU have to pay higher rates . There are many factors that determine the cost of your insurance and you can do things to help reduce your cost . Find a good agent and he/she will be able to tell you how to manage your rates .
Some insurance carriers may use a credit score for rating purposes . Most of the insurance carriers in my state -LRB- New York -RRB- use a ` credit profile ' which means they access one of the big three credit bureaus and select specific items . What they select , how they interpret the data , and how it affects your premiums is not available for your scrutiny . In NY , credit profile is mostly used for new business quoting purposes for home and auto insurance . Carriers in NY load in a whole bunch of rating info when determining your premium - gender , age , marital status , own or rent your home , driving extract , # of years licensed , prior claims on home and/or auto policies , is your prior carrier preferred , standard , or substandard , distance driven to work , pleasuire or business use , and a lot more . Keep your ` credit profile ' and score as clean as possible . Most banks and credit unions have credit specialists who can advise you for free on how to do this . For example , pay all bills ahead of time if possible and always pay more than the minimum amounts . Do n't have credit lines totaling more than a certain % of your gross annual income , etc. . Credit profile is a major influence when getting insurance quotes . I know of no ` proof ' credit profile is a determinate of loss potential , but using credit profile for insurance rating is the way of the world .
In addition to losing your license and visiting your local jail , you could subject yourself to financial ruin by not carrying auto insurance . The primary purpose of auto insurance is to protect yourself and others in the event of an accident . The vehicle itself should really be the least of your concerns . Dependent upon the circumstances , auto insurance could provide you coverage for injuries sustained by you . your passengers and others involved in the accident . Additionally , auto insurance could provide you with legal defense in the event you are sued . These are only some of the consequences you could face by not carrying adequate auto insurance . That 's why it is important to have an agent you can trust where you can sit down to discuss how to best protect yourself .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover your auto while in the garage . Homeowners insurance covers the home and not autos . Only your auto insurance policy can protect your auto while in the garage . If you have an auto you do not drive and just store in your garage I would recommend purchasing comprehensive coverage only on your auto .
I agree with Cathy , but also offer one other major reason rates go up . Insurers are pricing a product before they know their cost . It something like building a spec house for sale at $ 300,000 with out knowing that the purchaser is going to require all hard wood floors , a finished basement and a three car garage . Had you known you would have priced your product at $ 400,000 . This is some of the dilemma of insurers . Thy can look at historical outcomes and yet may not see a trend developing before it happens . The reason most auto insurance is sold in Six month terms in the US , is that it often takes a minimum of one year for the carrier to realize rate level on all customers in a certain state and rate filing . Let me give an example : If company A sees it needs rate increase on its TX auto insurance business and puts that rate into effect after state approval on July 1,2014 it will take a full six months to raise the rate level to the new level for the last customer whose policy incepts on 12/31/2014 . Then it takes the company another 6 months to earn the premium for each of those customers . It has to set aside some money in case you decide to move your business , as well as keep reserves for accidents that have occurred or are known to be likely to occur in the future.So in a full year at 7/1/2015 the company has realized the effects of its rate filing in the state . If it now needs more funds , it will take the same 12 months to fully earn that premium . So in effect you can see that the process of getting an adequate rate for an insurers losses and expected losses is at least a year on six month polices and double that to two years to achieve the rate level on annual policies . That said , recognize that your rates can go up annually in a 12 month policy because of a company 's filings and go up as much as every six months for an insurer who uses 6 moth policies.So , all that said , you do n't control the pricing that is an aggregate need of the insurer but you can better protect yourself by buying a 12 month policy . Lock in a rate level . If you do not change the exposure -LRB- new car or new operators and such -RRB- , you will have locked in rate for one whole year . So my advice is to seek out an insurer that writes annual policies if available .
Insurance companies do n't force anyone to keep a policy in force regardless if it is auto , home , life , disability , long term care , health , business , workers ' compensation , etc. . However , type of policy and state where you are located can make a difference in how the cancellation is calculated . With an auto policy , you would want to contact the company or your insurance professional to determine if the cancellation is pro-rated or short-rated . Pro-rated means the company will only charge you premium for the days used . A short-rated calculation provides for a penalty . This information is also included in every policy contract .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Attic Mold ?
Generally NO . Property insurance does not cover problems that occur over time . And mold in the attic or anywhere is the result of long term unremediated moisture exposure and considered a maintenance issue . Some insurers provide limited mold remediation subsequent to a covered water claim but no stand alone coverage for the mold issue itself . Check with your insurance professional for a detailed explanation .
Generally NO . Property insurance does not cover problems that occur over time . And mold in the attic or anywhere is the result of long term unremediated moisture exposure and considered a maintenance issue . Some insurers provide limited mold remediation subsequent to a covered water claim but no stand alone coverage for the mold issue itself . Check with your insurance professional for a detailed explanation .
-- > Normal 0 Mold is a slow growing organism that forms on plants , food and other matter . You will find most property and liability insurance policies include an endorsement specifically limiting coverage for Fungi , Wet or Dry Rot or Bacteria . Mold damage used to be covered by property insurance policies , like homeowners policies , if it resulted from another covered loss . A few years ago , insurers slipped an exclusion into their policies for all types of mold loss but softened the impact by including a nominal amount -LRB- usually $ 10,000 -RRB- of coverage for mold damage to property and $ 50,000 for liability to others . Higher limits are usually available for an additional premium but most insurance buyers are not even aware of this option . Mold damage following a water damage loss or the breakdown of mechanical equipment could result in a serious loss . Increasing the mold coverage limits on homeowners , tenant-homeowners , dwelling and other property insurance policies should certainly be considered . This type of coverage , mold damage resulting from another covered loss , used to be free and was subject only to a policys limit . Now you have to pay for it and specific limits will apply but it remains an important insurance program consideration .
Your homeowners insurance may cover the removal of mold . It depends why there is mold in the first place as to whether they 'll cover it . If they do cover the removal of the mold , they will , most likely , have a limit on the damage . For coverage to be triggered for almost anything there must be a sudden and accidental occurrence that can be pinpointed : Roof damage from wind that let water into the house a burst water pipe or broken water heater There must be a covered cause for why the water entered the home . Only then will your company cover any resulting mold damage . Notice that I said `` resulting '' . Mold damage that appears because of seepage or some other maintenance issue will not be covered . Most companies now limit the amount of money they will spend to clean up mold damage . This will be explicitly stated in your policy and you should be aware of what that limit is . So , once again , there must be a covered cause for the resulting mold damage and there will usually be a limit for how much damage they 'll cover . be smart , read your policy and , above all , find an agent you can trust .
Mold and fungus coverage may be covered under your renters insurance . But the coverage most likely will be limited to a certain number , like $ 5K or $ 25K and deductible will apply . To better answer this question , check your insurance policy . If you can electronically search for the word `` mold '' do that . For example , The Hartford Insurance Company generally will pay out for mold damage that 's a direct result of a peril that 's covered by your policy . Let 's say mold , which needs moisture to thrive , is caused by water from a failed pipe , a covered peril . In that case , any resulting mold damage should be covered because the source of the water is covered by your policy . However , if mold is due to long-term neglect or overdue maintenance , then homeowners insurance is unlikely to cover the damage . Visit our website and instantly compare 3 HO proposals from Hartford , Travelers , Safeco on WEBSITELINK
There are hundreds of species of mold common to the United States . Small areas of visible mold that build up on moist areas in a home not only look bad but are also a health risk , the mold may cause allergy like symptoms and/or breathing difficulties . Basic home insurance policies , generally limit coverage for mold or exclude it . It is very easy for mold to grow given suitable conditions in a home that does n't show pride of ownership ; mold claims became so excessive in prior years , the insurance industry chose to limit or exclude coverage rather than raise premium to address the growing claims . Although the standard coverage will vary from State to State as well as vary between insurance carriers , it is important to view your specific insurance policy to find out if there is coverage for mold and what the limit is.In some cases , a carrier will actually allow an extended amount of coveragefor an additional premium . It is best to maintain a clean and moisture free structure to prevent the growth of mold . In homes with a basement , it is important to remove all moisture as quickly as possible following any leaks . The Federal EPA recommends homeowners clean up any area affected by mold which is less than 10 square feet using bleach or a suitable product , any area larger than that should involve a professional .
Mold is already in every home . Coverage from your homeowners policy will largely depend on the cause of the mold . If there in infestation of mold in the home , it is most likely excluded by the wording of the policy . However , that doesnt mean that a claim will be denied . If the mold is the result of a bust pipe , for example , coverage would probably be available . Some companies put a limit on recovery for mold damage . Some companies offer additional mold coverage for an additional premium . There are companies that write a stand-alone mold policy . The key is to prevent mold .
Mold is present in almost every home . Every home provides the environment for mold growth except for one thing , moisture . When there is damage from mold it is most often the result of leaking fixtures and appliances . Your homeowners policy likely contains specific exclusions for mold , however if the mold is the result of a covered lossruptured pipe , it could be a covered loss .
Mold is often specifically excluded in homeowners policies . Some companies place a monetary limit on the damages from mold . The underlying concept is that mold is present in every building but that moisture is required to activate the spores . Seeping water is also excluded as this is considered a maintenance issue . Mold is not sudden . If you suspect mold you need to contact an industrial hygienist to determine if mold is actually present and then have it removed . In the process the remediation contractor will likely discover the source of the moisture . As a preventative step replace washer hoses and the lines to the water dispenser in your refrigerator every few years . These are notorious sources of seeping water .
Homeowners insurance policies have a mold limitation or exclusion on the policy so there is a limit to the coverage . Also the question would be what caused the mold . If the mold was caused by a covered claim then there may be some limited coverage . If this is something occurring due to a non covered claim most likely the mold would be excluded . Always check with your agent .
Companies do cover mold damage , in many cases , yes , but more likely than not , there will be a specific limit on the coverage provided , usually about $ 10,000.00 . The mold must be of course the result of a covered peril in your Homeowners policy . In other words , if your home develops mold as a result of a flood , there will be no coverage because the cause of loos was the flood which is excluded under a Homeowners policy . You would need Flood Insurance for that .
Maybe . First , you must examine your policy to see if there is a universal denial of coverage for any mold damage . If there is then you are out of luck . However , if there is no such denial of coverage , move on to step 2 . Second , determine the source of the mold . This is important because mold needs moisture to grow . If your mold problem can be traced to a pipe bursting and spraying water all over your home , then you can make the claim . If the mold is growing because your house is old and moisture got in due to lack of maintenance , then you are out of luck . Another example is water backup , if your sewage drain backs up and you have resultant damage , without a sewer/drain backup endorsement you will be denied coverage . So , in summary : 1 -RRB- is mold excluded no matter what ; and 2 -RRB- if mold is not excluded , was it caused by a covered cause of loss ?
Great question ! After the great media `` black mold '' scare a few years back -LRB- yes , black mold is bad , as is most mold and fungi -RRB- most insurers quietly cut that coverage out of their homeowners policies . That is especiallytrue in the humid southern states , where mold is difficult to prevent . There may be a small amount of damage that is covered in your specific policy , so it is well worth your time to contact your agent and find out . If your policy has been in force for many years , it may also be a covered item , if the company had n't amended your policy along the way . Contact your agent , and they can tell you for certain . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
Mold is an issue that has received a great deal of attention in the media . A homeowners policy is designed to cover specified perils . Most of these perils are sudden and catastrophic . Mold is in every home all the time . Building materials provide a food source for mold . All that is needed for rapid growth of mold is moisture . The issue is frequently leaky pipes . The damage caused by leaky pipes is generally excluded . Speak to your agent before filing a claim to make sure that you have a solid claim .
Mold is in every home . Building materials provide the food necessary for mold to grow . Moisture is the ingredient necessary for mold to become a problem . Moisture , most commonly comes from leaking plumbing . Leaky plumbing is excluded in most homeowners policies . If the mold is the result of a sudden discharge from a pipe in the home , coverage might be available ; however , remediation normally eliminates that from happening .
Typically mold is not covered since mold is produced by continual water penetration that is either undetected or ignored . When water damage is covered on a policy , it is usually only covered if the original cause of loss is covered . You state you were told the original cause of loss was wind damage . If the water damage occurred at the same time , and was a factor of the wind damage -LRB- both happened during the same storm -RRB- , then depending on the type of policy you have -LRB- not the insurance carrier , but the actual policy -RRB- , you may have coverage . There are two types of policies - Open Peril and Named Peril . This is the first item you need to know about the policy you hold . On an Open Peril policy , all perils -LRB- specific cause of loss -RRB- are covered unless they are specifically excluded . On a Named Peril policy , all perils are excluded unless they are specifically listed as covered . On most policies , water damage is listed as excluded , unless specific conditions are met . For example , the policies my company writes in my area covers for `` accidental direct , distinct and demonstrable physical water damage of covered property from direct contact with water , but only if the water results from : '' and then goes on to list what conditions need to be present . In my opinion , unless the water damage was specifically caused by wind damage , and both losses were reported at the same time , you might not have coverage for these items . And most likely not the mold damage regardless of the cause .
Homeowner 's policies vary a lot and mold is excluded on a lot of policies so the only way to find out is to file a claim . It will probably depend on what caused the mold and exactly what the mold wording on your policy is .
As a rule the answer would be no . Mold is caused by long standing dampness . Your homeowners policy may cover leaking roof due to wind or other covered peril but it is not going to cover mold in most situations . Check with your local agent to see if there are any exceptions in your policy .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
That is a great question ! You will need to look at your policy to see . Some insurers will include mold damage , others will not . Here in the hot and humid south , mold insurance is a rider , or a separate coverage as a rule , since mold is so prevalent . Contact your agent , and find out whether yours does . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Is it common for landlords to be interested parties on tenants ' renter 's insurance ?
As astute landlord will require that a tenant provide liability insurance and name the landlord as an additional insured . The liability insurance is normally contained in a renters policy . This makes it easy to handle a claim . Without this clause the claimant could sue both the tenant and the landlord .
That 's a great question ! Lol , the smarter ones will want to know ! They are also protected when you have insurance , and left with increased risk when you do n't . Put yourself in the landlords shoes - if a tenant is willing to try to get coverage only long enough to get the apartment and then drop it , are they really a tenant that the landlord wants ? Probably not . A landlord that wants to know is conscious of everyone 's safety , and that 's ultimately a good thing . Thank you for asking !
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
My response to this question might be a little different . Landlords , or their legal counsel , often require tenants to provide a form of `` Renter 's '' insurance for a number of reasons . First , if a tenant has renter 's insurance , it may indicate they are prudent and responsible . Most would agree it is prudent and responsible for any residential or commercial tenant to maintain adequate property and liability insurance . Before most insurance companies issue an insurance policy , they screen potential insureds to make sure they are responsible citizens and have reasonably good credit . Requiring Renter 's insurance would provide the landlord some assurance the tenant was able to pass those tests . In addition , if a tenant 's negligence resulted in injury or damage to the landlord 's property or injury or damage to other tenants or their guests in the building , the tenant may be responsible for indemnifying the damaged parties . The tenant 's Renter 's insurance would provide some assurance the tenant or his insurer would have the resources to back up that obligation .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
A Landlord can demand anything that they would like in a Rental Contract ; it is up to the Renter to agree to it or not . In most States , renters insurance is n't required but is very popular . In actuality , for those tenants that resist buying insurance , a Landlord requiring insurance per the rental contract is doing the tenant a favor . Even if the renter has no interest in the loss of his or her personal belongings , renters insurance includes personal liability coverage . If the tenant is found negligent in the event of a claim , the renters policy would provide coverage to the claiming 3rd party ; in many cases , the claimant may be the apartment building owner or home owner who has suffered the loss . Without insurance , an ugly and lengthy legal battle could ensue causing grief to everyone involved . If after reading this response , the tenant would like to lease a home or apartment but has no interest in insurance other than to satisfy a requirement , it may be suggested to purchase the minimum Personal Property Coverage , the minimum Liability Limit and the maximum Deductible ; this will generate the lowest renters insurance premium . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used directly byConsumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
In our `` perfect outcome '' world the owner of the rental property has every right to avoid assuming responsibility for the negligence of its tenants . Too often plaintiff 's lawyers seek deeper pockets for injuries real and alleged and when the tenant is found to be uncollectible the owner often gets stuck with the bill when a judgment needs to be paid . The property owner -LRB- landlord -RRB- is acting in a reasonable and prudent manner when they insist upon a tenant taking responsibility for their own liability and insurance needs by requiring evidence of insurance . If they did n't , it is n't unreasonable to presume that plaintiff counsel would argue that it is negligent on the party of the property owner not to expect or insist that a tenant have their own property and liability insurance as a condition of tenancy . The larger and more sophisticated the property owner the more likely they will have adopted risk management principles that require their tenants to have property and liability insurance as a condition of tenancy . It will become common practice in the years to come for almost every landlord to insist on evidence of insurance as a condition of tenancy . Financial prudence dictates the adoption of such a policy and I am aware of no law that prohibits a landlord from requiring proof of insurance coverage . And I go back to the original statement and assert that no landlord is wise to assume the responsibility for insuring the risk of the tenant and this is a risk that is clearly the responsibility of the tenant regardless of where they call home .
In my experience , landlords , or their lawyers , require tenants to provide insurance for a number of reasons . First , it shows the tenant is prudent and responsible . Most will agree it is prudent and responsible for any residential or commercial tenant to maintain adequate property and liability insurance . Before most insurance companies issue an insurance policy , they screen potential insureds to make sure they are responsible citizens and have reasonably good credit . If someone is able to secure insurance coverage , a landlord would have some assurance the tenant has passed those tests . In addition , if a tenant 's negligence causes injury or damage to the landlord 's property or injury or damage to other tenants or guests in the building , the tenant may be ultimately responsible to indemnify the damaged parties . To have some assurance the tenant has the resources to back up that obligation , the landlord often requires the tenant secure specific amounts and types of insurance .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Yes , Yes & Yes !!! Although Renters Insurance is designed to protect the Personal Belongings of the Renter , the policy also includes Personal Liability Coverage . There have been endless numbers of cases in Small Claims Court where there are issues between Landlords and Renters following damage to rental units . With the presence of a Renters Insurance Policy , the insurance company will investigate the claim and find if in fact the renter 's negligence caused the loss ; if so , the damage repairs will be covered by the tenant 's personal liability section of the Renters Insurance Policy . In some States , the Renters Insurance Policy is a requirement under the conditions of the standard rental agreement ; however , it is prudent of Landlords to require Renters Insurance . As a rhetorical question : ` Would you wish to rent your property to a tenant not concerned with insuring their own belongings ? ' Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and contrary to common belief , you do n't have to speak to a salesperson to obtain a quote and buy the insurance . In many States , the minimum coverage is $ 10,000 or $ 15,000 of Personal Property and the policy automatically comes with $ 100,000 of Personal Liability . Depending on your selected deductible , the premium may be as low as $ 100 per year . If you are responsibly cautious only about the liability issue , we would recommend selecting the highest deductible since this will generate the lowest premium ; the deductible does n't apply to the liability section . For an online free quote and online platform to buy renters insurance online , you may use : WEBSITELINK This link will allow you to get an online quote , select the coverage and deductible you desire and issue the policy online . For further details or to review your present coverage , you may contact a licensed company representative toll-free at : 877-931-3368 .
The reason why landlords want insurance is to protect themselves for either property loss or a liability suit . If you are a tenant in a commercial building and a client of yours gets hurt on your premises then that client may potentially sue you . If you have no insurance the client may sue the building owner just because it 's the landlords building even though the tenant may be the party who caused the loss . Same is true for private residences . The landlord does not want to take on a suit because your friend fell down in your home . Now for the record , just because the victim goes after the landlord does not mean you are off the hook as a tenant . If the landlords insurance ends up having to pay a claim you can almost surely bet they are coming after you so my suggestion is carry the insurance . There are way to many upsides and virtually no down side .
Renter 's Insurance does n't just insure your personal property . It comes with Liability Insurance as well . This is what the landlord is interested in . I will give you an example . Let 's say you had a candle burning and it caught the building on fire . If the building burns down , the landlord will collect from his insurance company . That insurance company then has a right to come after you since you caused the fire . Knowing that most people who live in apartments do n't have sizable net worth 's they assume they wo n't be able to get you to pay them for the damage to the building and for loss to other tenants in the building . So , the landlord 's insurance company probably gives him a discount for requiring tenants to have Renter 's Insurance . Your Renter 's Insurance will pay for certain types of damage that are caused accidentally by you , such as fire and explosion under your liability coverage . This is a great way to protect your assets and Renter 's Insurance is very Inexpensive . If I can help shoot me an email at dbeukel1@amfam.com .
In some States , the Law requires for all Tenant Lease Contracts to include a clause requiring tenants to purchase and provide proof of Renters Insurance to the Landlord . In most States , this is not the case . However , a Landlord has the right to require a tenant to responsibly be insured as part of the agreement ; as long as both the Landlord and Tenant sign the Lease , it is a legal agreement . Renters Insurance is very inexpensive and provides a huge protection to both the Landlord and the Tenant in the event of a claim . The minimum amount of Personal Liability is $ 100,000 on most contracts and has no associated deductible ; the minimum amount of Personal Property coverage could be as low as $ 20,000 to which the policy deductible will apply . In order to generate the lowest premium for those uninterested in coverage but required to purchase coverage , one should obtain a quote for the minimum liability limit , the minimum personal property coverage and the maximum deductible . Providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be useddirectly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance covers the Personal Property of the Insured Tenant , offers Loss of Use for a covered hazard and provides Personal Liability for the Insured Tenant and resident family . The Renters Insurance Policy is commonly known as a Form HO4 and is available in all States . Renters Insurance is mandatory in a few States where the Government has been faced with an unusually high number of law suits thus inundating the legal system ; in other States , you will find some Landlords require tenants to purchase the insurance to provide a layer of protection for the possible negligent acts of a tenant causing property damage to the building , property of other tenants or inadvertent bodily injury to others . The possession of Renters Insurance is a display of genuine responsibility for one 's personal property and protection for others . Renters Insurance Online is available online in multiple States at the following link : WEBSITELINK In order to produce a lower premium , it is recommended only to purchase the minimum amount of Personal Contents coverage to sufficiently replace the personal property of the insured and to select a high deductible . This combination will generate a comparatively lower premium ; renters insurance is written for an annual term and is fairly inexpensive .
Always . And the landlord should request evidence of the existence of the renters insurance . Reason number one : Under the personal liability coverage of a renters policy the carrier agrees to pay the sums the insured is legally liable for as a result of bodily injury or property damage . What type of occurrencescould be involved ? A guest in the renter 's apartment slips on a wet bathroom floor , falls , and is injured . This is bodily injury . The tenant leaves a pan of oil on the stove unattended and a fire results damaging the building . This is property damage . Reason number two : Unless legally liable , the landlord is not responsible for the tenant 's business or personal property -LRB- for things like fire , theft , mysterious disappearance , etc -RRB- The tenant should cover their own property with insurance like a renters policy .
That 's really an individual decision . The part of the the renters policy that the landlord would most be concerned with would be the liability coverage . The personal property coverage is going to be different from tenant to tenant . Most policies typically start liability coverage at 100000 . In many instances the landlord may feel this is sufficient but in the case of an accident on the rental property if the tenants liability coverage is not sufficient enough to cover the loss the person -LRB- s -RRB- involved may attempt to turn a claim into the landlords carrier so the landlord may wish to require a higher limit on the policy for liability coverage .
Homeowners Insurance is usually associated with the owner of the dwelling ; whereas Renters Insurance is specifically intended for the non-owner occupant of the dwelling . Renters Insurance is intended to provide Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Coverage for the tenant of a home . In a tenant occupied situation , the owner of the dwelling will usually carry Landlords Protection Coverage for the dwelling which does not offer any protection to the tenant . The tenant should purchase his/her own Renters Insurance . This is coverage is very inexpensive and is well worth it ; there have been many instances where a property owner has brought legal action against a tenant for negligence leading to a fire or other type of claim ; the Renters Insurance provides Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant which may provide defense in such an occurrence . For a renters quote in California , Arizona or Nevada , you may click on : WEBSITELINK For all other States , you should find a licensed representative in your State for a quote .
That is a great question , with a very simple answer ! Your landlord wants to pay lower insurance premiums himself ! By ensuring that each tenant that they rent to has a renters policy , the risk that the landlord 's insurance company has to shell out after a catastrophe is lessened . The tenant causes the catastrophe , their insurance company is liable for the damages , not the landlords . Hopefully the landlord is passing along his or her savings to you in the form of cheaper rent . Thank you for asking ! -LRB- p.s. renters insurance is cheap , and a really good idea for you to have anyway , so the landlord is really doing you a favor by requiring that you have it . -RRB-
Yes an apartment complex or landlord for that matter can require by contract that all tenants maintain renters insurance . This would be a condition of the rental agreement and is designed to protect from a liability suit against the landlord for a potential claim caused by the tenant . If you do not wish to carry renters insurance you have the option of seeking a different landlord without the requirement . On a personal note , renters insurance is very inexpensive and covers so much . It really makes no sense not to carry renters insurance .
Renter 's insurance will typically not protect the landlord directly . Renters insurance typically provides liability and personal property coverage for the insured tenant and the immediate family of the insured tenant only . If a tenant has renters insurance it may prevent the landlords insurance from involvement in claims that occur within the rented premise . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Long Will It Take To Get Health Insurance ?
This will depend on the type of insurance sought . Some insurance policies will be effective next day , while others are the first of the next month . Answers to some basic health questions will start the process toward determining which type of plan may work best for you . For help feel free to call me at 913-279-0077 .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
There are life insurance policies that can take a very long time to get , and there are policies that can take a very short time to get . The difference is how much is required during underwriting and how fast or slow the people working on your application are moving . While rare , No Exam life insurance exists that can literally be applied for , approved and issued within an hour . Most No Exam life insurance policies take a few days or more , depending on whether they also order medical records , and depending on how fast that particular life insurance company processes their No Exam policies . If the agent or agency you used is nonresponsive , this can also hold things up . Policies that require medical underwriting can take much longer . If you are in good health and utilize a `` quick '' app like many carriers offer , you will often need to do a long phone interview , but this can cut down your chances of the life insurance company ordering medical records . Having to wait on doctor 's offices providing medical records to the insurance carrier is the major cause of extended time during underwriting , so if that step is avoided , the process will go much faster . If your policy does require medical records to be approved -LRB- most policies requiring an exam do require medical records if a health condition exists -RRB- , you can help speed it up by calling your doctor 's office or perhaps even obtaining your medical records yourself . Also , be sure to list on your application ALL the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , or any physicians that were involved in your diagnosis . Being able to order those from the start , rather than having the underwriter find out about them through reading one set of records and THEN having to order those additional records , can shave weeks to months off of the time it takes to put your policy in effect . Finally , if you are need to take a medical exam , take it as soon as possible . Much of the rest of the process revolves around that , so getting that out of the way quickly could help you have a policy in your hands within one month .
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Applying for Disability Insurance is similar to applying for Life Insurance . You must complete and submit the application , take a free insurance exam , and wait for the underwriter to review everything to determine approval . If there are medical records that need to be ordered , the length of time it takes to get the Disability Insurance will depend partly on how long it takes the doctor 's office to provide medical records . If you are asking how long it takes to receive the benefit from a Disability Insurance policy , that depends on the elimination period chosen .
How does long term disability insurance work ? Well you get to choose how long before it starts and how long it runs along with features that take effect when the policy is used . All of these aspect effect your cost . Actually long term disability is a very easy product to choose from as you can get a grid of waiting period and payout period on a spreadsheet to help put your policy together . You can choose when the policy starts , when it ends and if it grows with inflation or allows for partial disability and payments .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Life Insurance underwriting takes as long as it takes the life insurance underwriter to collect all the data needed to approve your policy . If you apply for a policy that does not need any exam or medical records , the process may take less than 24 hours . If they do not require an exam but can order medical records , it will take as long as it takes you or your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- to provide those records . If they require an exam , you will not be approved until at least 3 days after you take the exam . In other words , the faster you and your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- respond to the underwriter 's requests , the shorter the time it generally takes for your policy to be approved . However , things can get held up if life insurance companies get behind , the paramed examiner will not work with you to set up your exam , your doctor 's office is slow to provide your medical records to the life insurance company , and/or additional medical records must be ordered weeks or months into the process . Above all , a good Case Manager who regularly communicates with you and the insurance company can shave time off the underwriting process . Using an agency that has great customer service may not only help speed things up , it may be the key to getting your life insurance put into effect , period .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
The things to look for in a disability insurance policyare as follows : 1 -RRB- Is it short term -LRB- under 6 months -RRB- or long term -LRB- at least 2 years -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long is the elimination period -LRB- how long until you start getting paid benefits -RRB- the most common are 30-60-90-180-360 days ? 3 -RRB- How long is the benefit period -LRB- how long do they benefits pay for -RRB- common benefit periods are 2-5-10-20 years or age 65 or age 67 ? 4 -RRB- What is the rating class of your occupation -LRB- 1A-5A -RRB- the lower the number the higher the premium ? Blue collar versus white collar occupations 5 -RRB- How much does the benefits reduce when you become eligible for Social Security benefits -LRB- there are riders toincrease that reduction -RRB- ? I would highly recommend using an experienced independent broker to find the right coverage at the best price for your unique situation . 5 -RRB-
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can take a defensive driving course and get a discount on your auto . It can vary based on what state you live in . You can take a look at your deductibles as well . You may have a very low deductible and not even realize it . You should make sure how much you use your vehicle is how it is listed on the policy . Many insurance companies choose rate based on how long you commute to work and / or how many miles you drive the vehicle per year . That can change throughout the years so make sure that is up to date on your policy
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
That is a great question ! Insurance companies will set a commencement date far enough ahead into the future to show you an impressive number for your return , and that is the date by which you must have started taking your withdrawals . The truth is that you can take money out at any time , BUT - there are serious consequences if you are n't careful . An annuity is not a suitable product for someone who has cash flow issues , and might need the money sooner than later . I 'd advise you to look at your policy , and look for these things : Do I have a free withdrawal amount , if so , how much and when can I start taking it ? How long is the surrender period , and what are the charges ? -LRB- If the surrender period is ten years , that means every year during that period , whatever you withdraw will be subject to that fee , among likely others , as well as a federal penalty of 10 % if you are younger than 591/2 -RRB- The last thing to look at is what triggers if you pull money out . Does it start , or lock in a payment cycle for you ? Again , that could be disastrous if you are n't very careful . Let the money ride in there as long as you can afford to , -LRB- at least until you are 60 -RRB- and then start taking your withdrawals . Depending on how your annuity is structured , you may be required to start your rmd 's at the age of 701/2 . If you 'd like help with your specifics , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Does Medicare Approved Mean ?
Any time you have a claim , Medicare must approve the medical necessity of that claim and the amount they will pay . If a claim is not approved Medicare will not pay . Medicare when paying claims has a set payment they will approve for a specific procedure based on how that procedure is billed . Medicare will only pay 80 % of that approved amount for Part B covered charges . A doctor can not bill for more than 15 % of the Medicare approved charges . Some states like Ohio do not allow the 15 % excess charges . A doctor who accepts Medicare can not balance bill for more than the approved amount .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
`` Excess Charges '' only occur with Part B coverage . Whether or not a Medicare Beneficiary may be subjected to Part B Excess Charges by a provider depends entirely on how the provider is contracted with Medicare . When the provider choose their method of contracting with Medicare they must choose whether they will be `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' . This terminology may be confusing but it really is not . `` Participating '' simply means the provider will accept the Medicare assignment of the Medicare approved amount as payment as total payment -LRB- Medicare 's part -RRB- for services rendered . `` Non-Participating '' means the provider has chosen to not necessarily accept the Medicare approved amount as total payment -LRB- Medicare 's part -RRB- for services rendered and may choose to charge the beneficiary up to 15 % of the Medicare approved amount -LRB- in addition to the beneficiary 's cost sharing amount -RRB- . The provider may choose on a case-by-case basis whether to seek excess charges from the beneficiary . This rule applies ONLY to physician fee schedules thus applies only to Medicare Part B charges . So it depends entirely upon whether the provider has chosen to contract as a `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' provider with Medicare . If you are in doubt it may be beneficial to contact the office manager at your provider 's office and ask whether the provider is `` Participating '' or `` Non-Participating '' as it applies to Medicare approved payments . All the best . Mark
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
If you 're on original Medicare -LRB- Medicare Part A & Part B -RRB- , and go to a doctor and that doctor does not accept Medicare assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- , the doctor reserves the right to bill you an `` excess charge '' . An excess charge is an amount up to 15 % above and beyond the medicare-approved amount for the services provided by the doctor . For each type of service , examination , procedure , etc. , Medicare has an approved amount they deem as a reasonable and customary charge - this is known as the `` Medicare-approved amount '' . If the doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full for services provided . If the doctor does not accept assignment , they can bill you an excess charge . For example , if you had an exam completed that they billed $ 500 for . Medicare says that a reasonable and customary charge is $ 400 . This means that Medicare will pay $ 400 for the exam that was completed . If the doctor accepts assignment , they take the $ 400 as payment in full . If they do not accept assignment , they can bill you up to 15 % of that $ 400 amount as an excess charge . In this example , the doctor could bill you for another $ 60 -LRB- $ 400 x 15 % = $ 60 -RRB- . If your Medigap plan covers excess charges , the Medigap insurance carrier will pay it for you . If the plan does not cover excess charges , you will be responsible for the payment of the excess charge . The two Medigap plans that cover excess charges are plans F and G. All of the other Medigap plans do not offer this benefit . So if you 'd like to have this benefit and do not already have a plan F or plan G , you may want to consider applying for one with a carrier . Remember , Medigap plans are standardized , so the only difference between insurance companies Medigap plans are the price they charge for it . Please note , certain states do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure law -RRB- . The states that do not allow excess charges are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . If you live in one of these states , then the Medicare Part B excess charge benefit of Medigap plans F and G will not be major concern unless you move out of the state . Please note , those living in these states may want to consider Medigap plans C and D for price comparison to Medigap plans F and G as they provide the exact same coverage , just without the excess charge benefit , and may provide you some savings on your premiums . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Any time you have a claim , Medicare must approve the medical necessity of that claim and the amount they will pay . If a claim is not approved Medicare will not pay . Medicare when paying claims has a set payment they will approve for a specific procedure based on how that procedure is billed . Medicare will only pay 80 % of that approved amount for Part B covered charges . A doctor can not bill for more than 15 % of the Medicare approved charges . Some states like Ohio do not allow the 15 % excess charges . A doctor who accepts Medicare can not balance bill for more than the approved amount .
Medigap or Medicare Supplemental insurance is private health insurance put in place to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . It will help cover some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does not pay . For example , Original Medicare will pay around 80 % of your health care costs . This leaves you with the responsibility of paying the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved amounts . Medigap insurance will help pay copays , co-insurance , and deductibles -- the ` gap ' in Medicare coverage . Medigap Plans are standardized . There are 10 lettered Plans all offering different Medigap benefits . However , each lettered Plan has standardized benefits . This means Plan N with ABC insurance company is the same Plan N with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . The most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. Plan F covers all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any copays , co-insurance , or deductibles . Plan G covers all Medicare approved amounts -LRB- just like Plan F -RRB- after you 've met the small annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you are shopping for Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance , it is often challenging to find premium information on your own as many insurance companies do not publicly publish their premiums . With that said , you will find some very large insurance carriers who will give quotes online . This , though , can come with a higher premium to you . Another option is to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We freely shop the Medigap market and find you the best premium for the Plan benefits you desire . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your Medigap insurance needs .
Medicare does cover Home Health Care , BUT only if : its ordered by a Medicare approved physician AND the person in incapable of leaving the home AND services are rendered by a Medicare approved provider AND the person requires more than just assistance with activities of daily living -LRB- eating , bathing , dressing , toileting , functional mobility -RRB- . Medicare will not pay for services performed by immediate relatives or members of a patients household . Medicare does not pay for Assisted Living or Adult Day Care . If these conditions are met , Medicare will generally cover medical services in the home as ordered by a Medicare approved physician .
Quite simply , Medigap Plan F will cover the 20 % of Medicare approved costs that Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- does not pay . This means you will not have to pay any deductibles , co-insurance or co-payments for Medicare approved amounts . Many people enjoy Plan F because they do n't want to deal with any costs and want all their Medicare approved expenses paid . You are responsible for paying the Plan F premium to the insurance company . As long as you keep making the premium payments , your Plan F is guaranteed renewable . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Cataract surgery is generally performed under Part B . It will cover 80 % of the approved amount . If the doctor accepts Medicare then he will be required to accept whatever Medicare approves . You are only responsible for 20 % . Some states allow 15 % excess charges over what Medicare approves . The exact amount Medicare approves would depend on the way the charge is billed . Ask your doctor what Medicare usually pays . This may help give you an idea of your responsibility .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement programs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A co-payment is the portion of the bill you are responsible for . Under original Medicare you are responsible for 20 % of the Medicare Approved amount . You will receive an explanation of benefits from Medicare outlining what the charges were , what was approved , what they paid and what you are responsible for . Your doctor can not balance bill you the difference . Some states allow 15 % over the Medicare approved amount in excess charges .
Since all Medigap plans are standardized , the benefits are exactly the same with every insurance company . This means that Medigap Plan F with ABC insurance company is the exact same Medigap Plan F with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is price . Medicare does not regulate the price of Medigap Plans ... just the benefits . That 's why there is such a competitive market . Many Medicare Beneficiaries like the idea of purchasing Medigap through a well known insurance company , but that does n't mean you are going to get the best price . Medigap is not like health insurance for under age 65 where a Medical director approves or denies your bills . Medigap payments are made by the insurance carrier if it 's a Medicare approved item because they have to -- it 's the law . I suppose that was the long way of saying there is n't one insurance company that has the best Medigap coverage . They all offer the same standardized plans and pay the bills based upon CMS regulations .
Medicare is a federal government run program - the benefits provided under Medicare Parts A & B are the same in each state . If a doctor accepts assignment , they are accepting the Medicare approved amount as payment in full and will not bill the insured an excess charge . When a doctor does not accept assignment , they reserve the right to charge an amount above and beyond the Medicare approved amount , up to 15 % . For example , if you have a service done that Medicare says costs $ 200 and the doctor accepts Medicare , but not assignment , they can charge the insured up to an additional $ 30 for the service . A Medicare supplement plan is a great way to cover excess charges . If your primary care physician accepts Medicare , but does not accept assignment , you may want to secure a Medigap plan F . If they do accept assignment , a plan N may be more suitable to your needs . Plans F & G will cover excess charges - the other Medicare supplement plans will not . The states that do not allow excess charges -LRB- due to the Medicare Overcharge Measure Law -RRB- are Connecticut , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New York , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island and Vermont . However , this is only a critical item if you have a Medicare Supplement plan that does not cover Part B excess charges . If you have a plan F or plan G , then it wont really matter because the plan would pay the excess charges regardless . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Zytiga is the brand name for Abiraterone . Zytiga was approved by the FDA in 2011 and NICE -LRB- National Institute for Clinical Excellence -RRB- in 2012 . Zytiga is available but has not been proved to be cost effective . Based on the research I have done , it does not appear that Zytiga is approved by Medicare which means it would not be approved by Medicare Part D .
Medicare supplement plans are designed to dovetail into your original Medicare coverage . Medicare is primary , your supplement plan is secondary . Any Part A or Part B claim that Medicare approves is automatically covered by your Medigap carrier . Approved does not mean your carrier will pay the claim . Your plan may not pay some deductibles , or excess charges .
The Part B Excess Charge is the amount above what Medicare approves for a procedure or office visit . Providers can bill you for excess charges if they do not accept Medicare Assignment . Because the doctor does not accept Medicare Assignment , he or she is able to charge an additional amountthis is the Part B Excess Charge . The doctor , however , is limited to charging 15 % over the Medicare approved amount . To avoid excess charges it is important to understand Medicare Assignment . This term refers to providers who WILL accept full payment by Medicare . If a doctor does not accept Medicare Assignment , he or she IS allowed to bill you for Part B Excess Charges . To find out if your doctor accepts Medicare Assignment you can always call their office or visit Medicare.gov and locate the physician information . If you do n't like the idea of paying Part B excess charges , you can consider purchasing a Medicare Supplement plan to cover that expense . In 2014 , there are two plans -LRB- F , G -RRB- that have that benefit . Thank you for reading my reply . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
According to the 2014 Medicare and You handbook distributed by CMS , physical therapy is a limited Medicare approved item . Medicare covers an evaluation and treatment for any injury or disease that changes your ability to function -LRB- provided a doctor approves your need for physical therapy -RRB- . There may be a limit on the amount Medicare will pay for physical therapy services in a single year . Most Medigap Plans will pay the remaining 20 % that Original Medicare does not pay for Medicare approved physical therapy .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not includeHPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not include HPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
end question
start question
annuities
How Do Annuities Work When You Die ?
After you make a contribution into an annuity , the value grows tax deferred . This is one of the key reasons that people invest in annuities . If you have had money invested in an annuity for a period of time there may be a large amount of deferred income . When you die your beneficiary will receive the proceeds and will have to pay income taxes on the amount of the deferred income . There is a spousal exemption to this however , so if your beneficiary is your spouse they will have the option of continuing the deferral .
An annuity is a legal contract that allows you to designate a beneficiary and contingent beneficiary . If you die during the accumulation phase of a deferred annuity , the amount accumulated will be sent directly to your beneficiary outside of probate . If you die during the disbursement phase the particular option that you have selected will dictate the distribution of any remaining assets . For example if you have selected a joint life annuity , some portion of the payment will continue until the death of the second annuitant .
A `` single-premium immediate annuity -LRB- SPIA -RRB- '' is an annuity . That is to say , an annuity is defined as an income stream that continues until the annuitant dies when a person pays a lump sum of money -LRB- single premium -RRB- to an insurance company in exchange for that income stream -LRB- annuity -RRB- . So , the term `` single-premium immediate annuity '' is a bit redundant . Think of it as taking retirement money from a privately funded pension , except that , in this case , you are funding it with a one-time , lump-sum of money.The important thing to remember is that once you pay the single premium , that money is essentially `` gone '' . You have just `` purchased '' an income that you can not outlive.There are all sorts of ways to design the annuity -LRB- stream of income -RRB- . You can get a monthly check , quarterly check , annual check - just about any payment schedule you can think of . You can also have the annuity pay out completely should you die before the original single premium you gave to the insurance company gets paid out . Should you choose that option , you will need to name a `` beneficiary '' to receive the remainder of the payout.Annuities , in general , are complex insurance contracts and space is not provided here to go into all the details . But , be absolutely certain that an annuity is right for you before you fork over the money because once it is committed to the contract , you either ca n't get a refund or there are stiff surrender penalties associated with backing out of the deal . Work only with an experienced insurance professional that has a solid working knowledge of what annuities are , how they work , and whether or not it is in your best interest to own one . More advanced knowledge about annuities can be obtained by consumer-friendly websites online .
Another part to this answer is that not all life insurance policies ever pay a death claim . Most life insurance is not designed to be in force when you die unless you die younger than average . Term Life Insurance only pays a death claim if you die while it is in force . That 's usually 20-years when you are in your 30 's and 40 's and often up into your low 60 's . But most people do n't die that young . Other insurance is tied to your employer and only covers you during your working years . Most people do n't die during your working years . So the insurance company gets to keep all those premiums . Whole-life insurance is priced much higher than the others because it will pay a death claim 100 % of the time unless you cancel the policy . All insurance is priced based on the likelyhood of it ever paying a death claim . That 's why a healthy 35 year old man can buy a million-dollar 20-year term policy cheaper than a 70-year old would pay for a $ 10,000 whole-life policy . One is very unlikely to ever cost the insurance company anything . The other will certainly be paying a death claim within the next couple decades if not sooner .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Joint Universal Life Insurance is a universal life insurance policy that covers two people . It can be a `` first to die '' or `` second to die '' policy . If a first to die UL , the policy will pay the death benefit to the survivor when the first of the two persons passes away . If a second to die UL , the policy will pay the death benefit to a third party when both of the insured persons have passed . This latter type of joint coverage is also called survivorship life insurance . Some reasons people may purchase joint universal insurance are : 1 -RRB- They want to consolidate the number of policies they have . 2 -RRB- One of the insured persons may be uninsurable under a regular policy , but can be covered by a second to die policy . 3 -RRB- Only the survivor needs the coverage ... after the second person passes away there is no need for life insurance ... thus a first to die policy works well for them .
I am going to take a philosophical approach to answering this question . I think it would help you understand the value you are getting for your dollar with this product . Lets suppose that you know with absolute certainty you are going to die next Tuesday . No doubt about it . Was definitely going to happen . Sad to think about , but hey - we are talking about life insurance . Now lets suppose that an insurance company is willing to insure you . -LRB- Yes , I know its crazy , but work with me here . -RRB- And lets suppose they are willing to offer you a $ 1 million policy . Would that be enough ? OK , lets say it would be . How much would you be willing to pay for that $ 1 million of coverage ? You know that the company is going to put out that money . The payout is guaranteed . And you know that the premium is going to be lower than the benefit . Even if you paid $ 900,000 for that $ 1 million dollar policy , you would still get a 10 % return on your money . By any standards , that is a good deal . If you had that money , no doubt you would pay it . And that would be a good deal for three reasons . One : your beneficiary would be getting money that was needed when they lose you . Two : there is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . Three : the cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . All true ? So you would do everything possible to make this deal happen all because you know you are going to die next Tuesday . The only difference between this hypothetical scenario and real life is that you do not know when you are going to die . It could be tomorrow . It could be next Tuesday . I could be in 20 years . You just dont know . Otherwise , all factors remain exactly the same : You know you are definitely going to die sometime . You know your beneficiaries will need the money when they lose you . There is an ironclad contractual guarantee from a very strong financial institution to give them that money . The cost would be very reasonable and you would definitely get your dollars worth . The moral of the story is that regardless of the cost , life insurance virtually all the time remains a fantastic deal . You just have to be willing to pay for it . The better question is : what is the value of a good life insurance policy . Want to keep learning ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
Complete a life insurance needs analysis - there are general worksheets that you can google for , however , to get the most accurate picture , you should talk with an experienced life insurance broker . The purpose of the insurance is a driving factor in determining how much and how long you need the coverage for -LRB- e.g. paying off a mortgage , income replacement , estate planning , family protection , etc. -RRB- . Someone only looking to pay off debts only `` needs '' the coverage til the debt is paid off . For example , if you have a $ 500,000 mortgage that should be paid off in 30 years , you would only `` need '' the coverage for 30 years , so a term insurance policy may be more suitable to the need than a permanent policy . If you 're looking to provide income for your family in the event of your death , you may want a combination of term and permanent coverage . Once you 've figured out how much coverage you want and how long you need it for , you then need to find the carrier 's program that is going to offer the coverage at the lowest possible cost . This is where the risk classification comes in . This is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for . You also want to make sure of the type of coverage you have - full coverage or Accidental Death & Dismemberment -LRB- AD&D -RRB- . With full coverage , the proceeds are paid out whether death occurs by illness or injury . Under an AD&D policy , the policy only pays out if you die by a specified circumstance -LRB- e.g. a car crash -RRB- - if you die by illness and you have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit . This is important because people see the price of an AD&D policy and it looks very attractive because it 's cheap . That 's because you 're more likely to die by illness than you are of an injury . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
The main risk people face with fixed annuities is the buying power of the payments you receive because they do not have a cost of living adjustment -LRB- COLA -RRB- built in . Annuities offering COLAs are available , but generally require a higher premium to account for the increase in payments . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You want to find the structure that is going to be the most suitable to meet the needs you want to have covered . There 's a number of factors that you should think about when buying life insurance including : 1 -RRB- Why do you need the coverage ? 2 -RRB- How long do you need it ? 3 -RRB- What risk class do you qualify for ? -LRB- this is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Does the policy provide full coverage -LRB- payout whether death occurs by illness or injury - if you die by illness and you only have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What is the company 's financial rating ? - this is a big point when you 're looking at permanent coverage . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Brokers can help you through the entire process from start to finish . This includes helping you determine how much coverage is suitable to what you need the coverage for and how long you should have it in place for through an insurance needs analysis , provide quotes from multiple carriers and compare the options with you , track the application while it 's in underwriting and provide assistance on future needs as well . If you 'd like assistance in buying a life insurance policy , send me a message - my contact information is provided on my profile . I do not charge fees for my input and can walk you through the entire process of securing a policy .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
There are Joint and Survivor Annuities that cover two or more lives and continue in force as long as any of them survive . There are Joint Life Insurance policies that cover two or more lives , which end when the first of the insured persons die . There are Survivor Life Insurance policies that typically cover two lives , which end when the last of the insured persons dies -LRB- thus the name , Second to Die -RRB- . Finally , there are Joint and Last Survivor policies that are a variation of Joint Life Insurance , which pay when the second persons die .
Knowing the disadvantages of all financial assets is a good idea , so good for you to check ! All financial assets have their issues . The key to financial success is to determine which ones fit your financial situation the best and how to assemble an overall mix of assets that serves you best . Annuities often have a place in a portfolio even with their limitations . You would think your question would be easy to answer . The true , but maybe not too satisfying answer is , it depends on how it is used . Annuities are a tool and when used well they can yield excellent results . If used poorly they can be hazardous to your financial health . This is a deep topic so I will just list a few things to look out for to determine if an annuity is appropriate for you . I would advise you to ask your friends for a referral to a reputable insurance professional . And I would look to your CPA or tax advisor to advise you on the tax implications of owning an annuity . This is best done in a joint meeting of both the insurance professional and the tax advisor . Are you under 59 and 1/2 and subject to the IRS 10 % early withdrawal penalty How liquid is the annuity ? How long do the early withdrawal penalties work and how much will they let you take out annually without penalty ? Can you afford to defer your gains and let them grow past the penalty periods ? Is there a market value adjustment cost in addition to the early withdrawal penalty ? How is the interest rate calculated ? How long are current rates locked in ? Will the credited interest rate go up with rising interest rates ? How financially strong is the insurance company you are looking at ? Are you confident they will be able to deliver on their contractual promises ? What are their independent ratings ? Annuities require ongoing attention . Are you willing to meet with your advisors periodically to manage them ? These and many other factors should be considered in determining if an annuity is appropriate for you . Competent professionals use annuities to provide safe income , growth and tax benefits . They are useful in many situations . Be mindful that they are only one of many tools a financial professional may use in helping their clients ' meet their financial goals .
When people that you love will suffer when you die , you need life insurance . If that need will remain for many years , perhaps even until the day that you die , you need permanent insurance . The most popular form of permanent insurance is whole life insurance . It provides that the company will pay fixed amount when you die , regardless of when that occurs . In exchange you are required to pay a premium that is also fixed and does not change even as you grow older and the risk of death increases dramatically . There are alternative forms of permanent insurance in which you give up guarantees for flexibility .
The smallest premium I have seen for a life insurance policy is $ 15 . The highest is in the millions . The amount of coverage that you can get for any given premium amount depends on your age , health history , tobacco use , gender , height-weight , etc. . The biggest factors are how much coverage do you need ? And how long do you need it to cover you ? Whole-life insurance is much more expensive then term because it will always pay a death benefit no matter how old you live as long as you pay the premium . Term is temporary insurance and is much less expensive then whole-life because it will rarely ever pay a death claim . Most people do n't die at a young age and drop their term policy long before they get to the age when they are likely to die . You can always pull up free rates for term life insurance at WEBSITELINK Your independent agent can help you understand which companies will approve you .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Auto Insurance Have To Be In Your Name ?
In Illinois , the vehicle one is driving must be insured or a fine may be imposed . So in that regard , no , the policy does not need to be in your name . However if you own the vehicle you are likely going to be legally responsible for any incident involving its use , so you would certainly want to be named on the insurance contract .
In CT anyway , in most cases , the insurance needs to match the vehicle 's registration . There are a couple of situations , however , where you as an individual may be able to purchaseinsurance for as auto that is not in your name . For personal insurance , you may be able to obtain `` Named Non Owner '' coverage . This does n't insure the car , but it does provide liability for you while you are driving it . The other situation is for an auto that is titled and registered to a business . If you own a businessthat is set up as a separate entity , namely a Corporation or a Legal Liability Company -LRB- LLC -RRB- for example , then you can and should obtain insurance for that autounder the company name .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
yes . you can buy what is called a named operator -LRB- aka non-owners -RRB- auto insurance policy . It covers you in any non-owned vehicle you drive . however , a named operator policy does not cover the vehicle that you are driving -LRB- meaning no comprehensive or collision coverage is offered -RRB- . A named operator policy only offers liability coverage , medical coverage and uninsured motorist coverage . as an alternative , some states also have what is called a broad form named driver policy . It is very similar to a named operators policy , but with some minor differences .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
In order to drive a vehicle in many States , the law requires a licensed driver to be insured ! If the driver does not own a vehicle , a policy form is available by the name of ` Named Non-Owner ' Insurance ; this insurance provides liability and optional uninsured motorist coverage for the named insured driving a vehicle not titled in his/her name . If you have a Named Non-Owner Insurance policy , the carrier upon request will issue an SR-22 endorsement to the Governing State Department of Motor Vehicles . In the event that the insurance is cancelled , an SR-26 cancellation form is issued and sent to the Governing Department in order to confirm cancellation of the insurance thus cancelling the SR-22 . If one does not desire to purchase the insurance and is merely attempting to get a Form SR-22 issued , there is no method to do so without keeping active insurance for the term that the SR-22 is required . The SR-22 is simply a reporting form confirming continuous coverage . Many States now require electronic reporting between insurance carriers and the State Department of Motor Vehicles .
Homeowners Insurance does not cover your auto while in the garage . Homeowners insurance covers the home and not autos . Only your auto insurance policy can protect your auto while in the garage . If you have an auto you do not drive and just store in your garage I would recommend purchasing comprehensive coverage only on your auto .
If your car is registered in a business name you would need a business auto policy to properly insure and protect both your auto and your business . Insurance must be in the same name as registered . I see many people set up corporations and register their auto in the corporation and then try to insurance there vehicle on their personal policy . Why have a corporation at all if you want to be sued personally in the event of an accident . All you serve to do is rip down any wall of protection you were tying to build .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
An auto policy covers an automobile , not a driver . If you are not the owner , and dont have any other insurable interest , you can not be named as the insured on the policy . The information about being a loan holder is important . You named to be named on the policy as a lienholder . If you lease the car to someone else than you also need to be named as the additional insured .
Yes you can if one is a personal auto policy and the other is either a collectors car policy or possibly a commercial auto policy . You also could have your won business and the one car has signage on it then you have to have a commercial policy on it and the other cars would be personal auto . Even if you name is on the title of both autos . As Also check with your agent and your carriers as to the guidelines they follow and also check your state laws
Does life insurance need to be probated ? No life insurance does not have to go through probate if a stated beneficiary is named within the policy . Life insurance bypasses probate in most situations . A person can name their estate as beneficiary if they so choose putting the money inside the estate to be broken up and divided according to the will . OR they can simply have named beneficiaries to which the insurance company distributes funds .
When you lease a car you do not hold the title so you are not the ` owner ' of the vehicle . Your lease may require you to provide insurance on the vehicle . Your policy -LRB- in your name -RRB- names the lessor as additional insured for liability coverages and loss payee for physical damasge coverages . If an individual holds title to the vehicle and you want to insure it , you will most likely have to register the vehicle in your name -LRB- a form from the state 's DMV authorizes this -RRB- and obtain insurance to cover your registration and plates . In this instance you would also name the individual title holder as additional insured for liability and loss payee for physical damage . If they have a lienholder on the vehicle you will have to include the lienholder as first loss payee and the individual as second loss payee . Chec k with a knowledgeable agent or broker who writes auto insurance for specific details . Your state 's DMV can also provide information . Maske sure an insurance carrier will underwrite the policy should you want to insure a vehicle you do not hold the title to .
Depending on your states requirements . In Montana you have to have an insurable interest in the auto . Other cases where you can insure a car that is not in your name is when you have a child living in your home and you have your car and theirs on the policy . There are otherreasons why you would do this example would be your fianc lives with you and you both drive only one car but the car is just your fiancs name the yes you could place this on a policy that you and your fianc are on the policy and even thought you do not own the car you own the policy and they are now the 2nd named insured
First of all , I hope everyone is ok from the accident . Well , there are a few questions that you need to ask and you need to take a look at the auto policy . How long has your grandson been living with you?Take a look at the policy to see ifyour grandson 's name listed on the policy as a named insured . Here is how `` you and `` your '' is defined in the policy : 1 . Those named in the declarations , and 2 . The spouse of the person -LRB- s -RRB- named , if they are a resident of the SAME household a. Living in the same household as `` You '' , or if not living in the same household as `` You '' , he or she isconsidered `` You '' unitl the earlier of : 1 . 90 days after a change in residency 2 . The effective date of securing his or her own coverage 3 . The date the policy expires A `` Family member '' is defined : 1 . A resident of your household who is : a.related to you by blood , marriage , or adoption b. is a ward or foster child . Now thatyour grandson lives with you , the insurance company is wanting to add him to your insurancebecausehe is a `` Family Member '' of your householdand not his step fathers.You need to discuss what you would like to happen with your current agent . The insurance company may offer a solution and have you sign a driver exclusion form that would specifically exclude your grandson from your policy .
In most states , by policy contract definition , a spouse is automatically a named insured even if the name does not appear on the policy declarations page . So yes your spouse is covered on your auto insurance . You can verify this by speaking with your insurance professional , and while you 're at it , take the opportunity to review all policies vs. your needs .
Keep in mind that an SR22 really is n't insurance at all . It is a state filing that attaches onto auto insurance . For people who do not own vehicles , the SR22 can be attached to either a named operators policy -LRB- aka non-owners policy -RRB- or a broad form named driver auto insurance policy .
end question
start question
annuities
Can A Deferred Annuity Be Surrendered ?
Can a deferred annuity be surrendered ? Short answer is yes , but before deciding to surrender you need to check to see if there are any surrender penalties involved . In many cases annuities can have a ten year long surrender window . Also there may be tax implications in the surrender depending on how long you 've had it and if you 're liquidating vs. transferring .
Most deferred annuities can be surrendered . Once the contract annuitizes or starts paying a monthly income for life , most contracts can not be surrendered . In reality most deferred annuities are surrendered . The earnings of the plan are tax deferred and might present substantial advantages to the owner .
That is a great question ! They can , but it may not be your best option , depending upon how long you 've had the annuity . Anytime you surrender an annuity , you will pay some form of fee or charge . -LRB- The insurance company does this to recapture some of the lost income they would have generated , and cover costs . -RRB- Your annuity in the first years will have a `` surrender period '' where these charges are very steep . They do this , as an incentive for you to actually derive a benefit from your annuity . The charges can vary widely , but generally start at 10 % plus fees , and gradually reduce as time goes on . If there was a bonus added to your annuity , this amount typically is removed or reduced also . You could stand to lose a big chunk of what you 'd invested . If you need quick cash , there are some better ways . If you would like to contact me , I 'd be happy to go over this in more detail with you . Thank you for asking !
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Almost every annuity can be surrendered . A deferred annuity frequently has a surrender charge . This charge is a percentage of the value of the annuity and normally reduces every year until it vanishes . There might be income tax consequences because the earnings inside the annuity have not been previously taxed . If the deferred annuity has started paying a lifetime income or other settlement to the annuitant , it is highly unlikely that the contract can be surrendered at that point .
Most deferred annuities can be surrendered . Once the contract annuitizes or starts paying a monthly income for life , most contracts can not be surrendered . In reality most deferred annuities are surrendered . The earnings of the plan are tax deferred and might present substantial advantages to the owner .
This depends on the type of Annuity . In an Immediate Annuity you are not able to withdraw from it at all . It pays you a set yearly income . Although sometimes there can be surrender features that give you a portion of your funds back . A Deferred Annuity usually allows for 10 % surrender charge free withdrawals during the surrender period . Some Annuities allow 5 % or 20 % withdrawals during the surrender period . Others allow for just the earned interest to be withdrawn . But the industry norm is 10 % . After the Surrender Period is over you are usually able to withdraw however much you want to .
A deferred annuity can be surrendered at any time . Surrender charges , which are a percentage of the value of the contract , apply for a term specified in the annuity . Before surrendering an annuity make sure that you understand the tax consequences . If the annuity is an immediate annuity or has started distributing a lifetime stream of income , most companies will not allow the contract to be surrendered
A Deferred Annuity is a type of Retirement Savings method . At a very basic level , it credits your money a certain rate each year . This rate is often a set interest rate . But it can be based on Index-Linked gains , or equity gains/losses . Your money grows until you decide to do 1 of 2 things : 1 . You can move it to a different financial instrument . 2 . You can choose to annuitize the funds , creating a guaranteed income stream . Of course , you can choose to take periodic withdrawals from your deferred annuity as well . But be aware of any surrender charges or % based limits on your withdrawals . Most Deferred Annuities impose an early surrender charge on any withdrawal over 10 % . But some limit it to the earned interest , 5 % , and some even 20 % .
Yes , deferred annuities can be surrendered . There will be a surrender charge if you surrender your annuity in the first years of the policy -LRB- usually 5 to 8 years , whatever is stated in your contract -RRB- . And you must wait to surrender it until after age 59.5 to avoid a 10 % penalty . You can switch annuities in a 1035 exchange without paying taxes on the surrender value .
Contingent deferred annuities are annuities with contingent deferred sales charges . This sales charge is a surrender charge that represents the costs incurred by the insurer to issue the annuity and is amortized -LRB- or spread out -RRB- over the course of several years -- generally between 5 and 15 years . Deferred can also refer to the fact that annuity is not an immediate annuity , meaning it will not pay an immediate income stream , but rather can be left to accumulate interest to increase the value of the annuity .
Can a deferred annuity be surrendered ? Short answer is yes , but before deciding to surrender you need to check to see if there are any surrender penalties involved . In many cases annuities can have a ten year long surrender window . Also there may be tax implications in the surrender depending on how long you 've had it and if you 're liquidating vs. transferring .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
What are deferred annuities best suited for ? The challenge with this question is that the term deferred annuity has at least two `` definitions '' . I will describe two scenarios and if your question is not answered , please do not hesitate to contact me . A deferred annuity can refer to exchanging a lump sum for a guaranteed income at a point in the future . In this situation , a deferred annuity would be suited for someone who wanted a guaranteed flow of income with no management responsibilities . A life annuity may or may not include a guaranteed payout . There are different options , so ask your insurance agent for details . In addition to the income amount , taxation during the the deferral period and of the income flow should be considered . In Canada , a deferred annuity can also refer to Guaranteed Investment Annuities -LRB- GIA -RRB- and Segregated Funds -LRB- variable annuities -RRB- . Both of these are issued by insurance companies and offer the option of an annuity in the future . Since they are issued by insurance companies , they also offer guarantees not offered by other institutions for non-registered investments . These include potential creditor protection and estate planning opportunities , such as bypassing probate . Segregated funds are similar to mutual funds , but they offer maturity and death guarantees . In addition , some segregated funds include the `` locking in '' of gains . Depending on your individual situation , there could also be some tax advantages to these plans . These type of deferred annuities are best suited for individuals who are looking for , and would benefit from , the additional features and guarantees . This is an overview of a potentially complex subject . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance please do not hesitate to contact me .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
Non qualified tax deferred annuities have surrender charges . In the early years , surrender charges can be expensive . Many annuities allow for a 10 % free withdrawal , but the gain is subject to ordinary income tax . Market adjustment annuities that can change the interest rate credited to the policy if it 's surrendered before the contract period , which to some is a liquidity issue .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Annuities can be categorized into two types : deferred and immediate . Immediate annuities provide income and can have a future date to begin distributions , including life time income you cant outlive . Deferred annuities accumulate tax deferred , a tax advantaged feature for long term annuities . Deferred annuities can offer fixed interest , indices -LRB- both domestic and foreign -RRB- and separate sub accounts featuring access to market equities and bonds -LRB- variable annuities , a security . -RRB-
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Is The Cost Of Medigap Insurance ?
The cost of a Medigap policy depends on which Medigap policy you want to apply for , your age , gender , tobacco usage -LRB- if any -RRB- , your zip code , and whether you 're married and applying together -LRB- for household discounts - available from some carriers -RRB- . In short , an average cost figure does n't mean much to the individual as the premiums can differ widely depending on where you are around the country and the other aforementioned factors . You want to compare prices from multiple companies when you 're shopping because Medigap plans are standardized , meaning the benefits are exactly the same regardless of who you buy it from - the price is the only difference . You should consult with an independent agent who can shop your case among multiple companies and offer you the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- offers great peace of mind when it comes to your health care . Original Medicare Part A and Part B , generally cover 80 % of your Medicare approved amounts for covered medical costs . Medigap Plans will help pay that remaining 20 % by covering the costs of copays , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some people think they do n't need a Medigap Plan because they have n't had any health issues . While that is great news , we do n't have a crystal ball to predict the future . A Medigap Plan that is already in place is there to offer that protection when you need it . If you wait until a significant health issue arises , it may be too late . Medicare Supplement insurance companies use medical underwriting to issue policies . If you 're not in a Guaranteed Issue or Initial Enrollment situation , you will have to answer health questions . Medigap policies do not fall under the Affordable Care Act umbrella , so insurance companies can deny you a policy based on your health . I 'll close with an example of a lady who called me wanting to add a Medigap Plan to her Original Medicare Part A and Part B . She was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mastectomy . As you can imagine , her hospital and doctor bills were substantial and she was looking for some help . I had to share the unfortunate news with her that because of her recent diagnosis she would not be able to apply for a Medigap policy at this time , but possibly in two years we could re-evaluate her situation . That 's quite a bit of time for more bills to pile up . Had she already put a Medigap Plan in place , her savings would be substantial . Just for example sake , a Medigap Plan F might cost someone $ 130 a month or $ 1,560 over twelve months . Still a lot lower than 20 % of a $ 100,000 operation . A couple of the most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. & nbspMedigap Plan F will cover all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any deductibles , co-insurance , or co-pays . Plan G acts just like Plan F after you have met the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you would like more information about the benefits of Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 . You can also visit my website at www.remedigap.com and check out my client testimonials .
If you want to help fill in the gaps that Original Medicare does n't cover , then you should consider buying Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance . A Medigap Policy can help pay your share of Medicare-covered services -LRB- the co-insurance , co-pays and deductibles -RRB- . Generally , Original Medicare Part A and B only cover 80 % percent of your health care costs , leaving you with the remaining 20 % to pay out of your pocket -- unless you have a Medigap Plan . If you have a significant health issue arise , twenty percent can get hit your budget pretty hard . A $ 3,000 procedure will cost you $ 600 in co-insurance . A $ 10,000 procedure will cost you $ 1,000 . Surgery costing $ 100,000 will leave you with a hefty $ 20,000 bill . Some people believe they should wait until their health dictates a need for Medigap insurance . Unfortunately , waiting is not the best option as you may not qualify for Medigap insurance once you `` need '' it . Medigap insurance companies are not bound to the Affordable Care Act , so they can ask health questions -LRB- unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation or your initial Open Enrollment period -RRB- . Your Medigap application will have to be approved through the medical underwriting department . To find out if you are in your initial Open Enrollment or a Guaranteed Issue situation , you can work with an agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance or call Medicare directly . If you do qualify , you 'll be able to buy a Medigap Plan in your state and not be required to answer any health questions . If I can assist you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- insurance , sold by private companies , can help pay some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does n't cover , like copayments , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some Medigap policies also offer coverage for services that Original Medicare does n't cover , like medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . A Medigap policy is different from a Medicare Advantage Plan . Those plans are ways to get Medicare benefits , while a Medigap policy only supplements your Original Medicare benefits . Medigap policies do n't cover everything ! Medigap policies generally do n't cover WEBSITELINK long-term care , vision or dental care , hearing aids , eyeglasses , or private-duty nursing .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company and ca n't guarantee if you 're paying the lowest cost for a standardized Medigap plan -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap or Medicare Supplemental insurance is private health insurance put in place to supplement Original Medicare Part A and Part B . It will help cover some of the health care costs that Original Medicare does not pay . For example , Original Medicare will pay around 80 % of your health care costs . This leaves you with the responsibility of paying the remaining 20 % of Medicare approved amounts . Medigap insurance will help pay copays , co-insurance , and deductibles -- the ` gap ' in Medicare coverage . Medigap Plans are standardized . There are 10 lettered Plans all offering different Medigap benefits . However , each lettered Plan has standardized benefits . This means Plan N with ABC insurance company is the same Plan N with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is the price . The most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. Plan F covers all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any copays , co-insurance , or deductibles . Plan G covers all Medicare approved amounts -LRB- just like Plan F -RRB- after you 've met the small annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you are shopping for Medigap -LRB- Medicare Supplement -RRB- insurance , it is often challenging to find premium information on your own as many insurance companies do not publicly publish their premiums . With that said , you will find some very large insurance carriers who will give quotes online . This , though , can come with a higher premium to you . Another option is to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We freely shop the Medigap market and find you the best premium for the Plan benefits you desire . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your Medigap insurance needs .
It depends a lot on which Medigap Plan you have . Medigap Plans are designed to cover most of what original Medicare Part A & Part B does not cover . However , all Medigap Plans do not have prescription drug coverage . You would need to get a Part D plan in addition to cover prescriptions . This is a good thing because you will be able to change your drug plan as your prescription needs change without needing to change your Medigap Plan . Medigap Plans also do not cover dental and vision , however , you can get a separate dental/vision plan . The quickest way to find out what Medigap Plans cover and is to go to our website . You can compare Medigap Plans instantly online at SummitMedigap.com .
The best Medigap Plan is the one that meets your needs . With that said , Medigap Plan F is widely touted as the best Medigap Plan . It 's very popular because it has the most comprehensive health care coverage of all Medigap Plans . Medigap Plan F covers all your Medicare approved charges . You do not have to pay any co-pays , deductibles or co-insurance . As long as you pay your monthly premium , you will receive your Medigap Plan F benefits . Some would argue that Medigap Plan G is becoming the ` best ' Medigap Plan . It acts just like Plan F after satisfying the annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The premium for Plan G is often lower than Plan F. . . which is why many people like it . It 's a personal preference as to whether or not you want to pay the Part B deductible yourself -LRB- Plan G -RRB- or have the insurance company do it for you -LRB- Plan F -RRB- . Some of my clients do n't like to be bothered with paying any bills , so Medigap Plan F works for them . While I have other clients who would rather save money on their premium and do n't mind satisfying the deductible . If would like more information regarding your specific situation , please feel free to contact me . In a matter of minutes , I can provide you with information on Medigap benefits and quotes for your area .
In addition to what Jason stated , I 'd also like to point out that not all insurance companies offer Medigap Select plans . In fact , the insurance companies that offer Medigap Select Plans often are the major companies advertising online . Their premiums are usually high and to make the Medigap Plan more ` affordable ' , they offer the Medigap Select . One of the great benefits of having a Medigap Plan is your freedom to choose any Medicare provider without the boundaries of a network . Getting a Medigap Select Plan will limit your freedom . While you may be happy with your local in-network hospital , if you want to see a cardiologist in a neighboring state , you 'll be out of luck on a Select Plan . There are dozens of insurance companies that offer Medigap Plans at affordable prices . I 've never had to offer my clients a Medigap Select Plan F , G or N because I 've always found them an affordable Medigap Policy by taking the time to shop the Medicare Supplement market .
You can buy a Medigap policy through a Medigap insurance agent - I highly recommend doing it through an independent agent who can shop your case among many carriers instead of just 1 or 2 through a captive agent -LRB- agents who are basically employees of a specific company -RRB- . You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap is health insurance sold by private insurance companies . Each insurance company has it 's own set of Medigap premiums . These premiums are usually based on the Medicare recipient 's zip code , age and tobacco status . Cost of your premium will also depend on which Medigap Plan benefits you want to buy . The best way to see how much a Medigap Plan will cost is to work with an independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . In just a matter of minutes , we can provide you with the insurance companies and premiums available in your area -- and , not just with the insurance carriers you see online . Once you have quotes tailored to your criteria , you 'll know exactly how much Medigap insurance will cost . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
My Blue Medigap is Medicare Supplement insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan . My Blue Medigap offers three Medigap Plans -LRB- A , F , N -RRB- through Blue Care Network . Medigap Plans A , F , N are standardized . The Medigap benefits from one company are the same exact Medigap benefits with another company -- the only difference is price . My Blue Medigap will have a different monthly premiums than other private insurance companies offering Medigap Plans A , F , N. It 's worth contacting an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can provide quotes in just a matter of minutes from companies you wo n't see online . We 'll do a side by side comparison showing you which company has the best Medigap price . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance with your specific situation .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
Medigap Plan G is a standardized Medicare Supplement insurance plan designed to fill in the ` gaps ' that Medicare does n't pay . Medigap Plan G covers 100 % of the following after meeting the Part B deductible $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- : 1 . Medicare Part A Coinsurance and Medicare approved hospital costs 2 . Medicare Part B Coinsurance or Copayment 3 . Blood -LRB- First 3 Pints -RRB- 4 . Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Copayment 5 . Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance 6 . Medicare Part A Deductible 7 . Medicare Part B Excess Charges 8 . Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- While Medigap Plan G benefits are standardized , it is sold through private health insurance companies . This means any insurance company that offers Medigap Plan G is required by law to provide Medigap Plan G benefits . The only difference is price . ABC insurance company can charge a completely different premium than XYZ insurance company for the same exact Medigap Plan G. It 's best to work with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . We can shop the market for you . We have contracts with insurance companies that you do not see online . This is how we help our clients find low Medigap Plan G premiums . Afterall , Plan G is Plan G -- you might as well find the the plan with the best rate . Please feel free to contact me if I can assist you with your specific situation . In just a matter of minutes , I can provide you with quotes for Medigap Plan G in your area .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can apply for a Medigap plan at any point during the year - Medigap plans are not subjected to the same restrictions as Parts C & D of Medicare . You can complete an application up to 3 months in advance of the proposed effective date for the coverage - please note , you have to have both Medicare Part A & Part B to buy a Medigap plan . For example , if your effective date is April 1st , you could apply as early as January 1st . And vice versa - you can set the effective date up to 3 months later from the application date -LRB- most will set it up for the 1st of the following month though -RRB- . The effective date for your Medicare Part B coverage is also the starting point for your initial open enrollment period - a 6-month window where you can buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting -LRB- this is the best time to buy a Medigap plan -RRB- . Beyond this window , you will be required to answer health questions on the applications and go through medical underwriting -LRB- there are no exams though -RRB- , unless you have a qualifying event for a guaranteed-issue right . You should work through a broker who can shop the case for you and find you the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost . It 's important to review your Medigap plan every year to see if a lower rate is available after the initial rate lock guarantee expires and/or when you have a rate increase . The benefits of a Medigap plan do not change from company to company - they are exactly the same . A plan F from one company features the exact same benefits as a plan F from another company . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can buy a Medigap Plan at any time during the year as long as you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have Original Medicare Part A and Part B , you may want to consider buying a Medigap policy sooner rather than later . Original Medicare only covers generally 80 % of your medical costs , leaving you to pay the other 20 % -- as well as the Part A deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 in 2014 -RRB- and the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The best time to buy a Medigap Policy is during your initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only , 6 month window when Federal law allows you to buy ANY Medigap Plan sold in your state -RRB- . During this period you can not be denied coverage . If you already have a Medigap Plan , you can buy a policy whenever you wish . You will just have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . Your application will have to approved through the medical underwriting department . It 's important to note that the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap Plans . If you have some health conditions , a Medicare Supplement Specialist can work with you to see which insurance companies might be good match for you . In some cases , you may have a Guaranteed Issue Right to purchase a Medigap Policy if you have other health care that changes in some way -- for example , you lose other health care coverage . This means you 'll get a small window of opportunity to purchase a Medigap Plan without being denied coverage . It ' s best to contact an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to help you determine if you are in this type of situation . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can assist you with your Medigap insurance needs .
You can apply for a Medigap plan up to 3 months before your Medicare Part B effective date - you must have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B to buy a Medigap plan . Once you have an established Medicare Part B effective date , you will have a 6-month open enrollment period to buy any Medigap plan from any carrier with NO medical underwriting - this is THE BEST time to buy a Medigap plan . After this point , you can buy a new Medigap plan whenever you would like -LRB- there are no annual enrollment periods for Medigap plans -RRB- , however , you would have to go through medical underwriting if you do n't qualify for a special enrollment period or a guaranteed-issue right . Determining which Medigap plan is right from you and which carrier to apply for the plan through can be a bit more involved than some may realize . It 's not all about price as some may believe . You need to look at the carriers ' premium rating methods -LRB- community , attained , or issue age rated -RRB- , their rates , their rate increase history , their service history , and other factors . It 's best to consult with an experienced Medigap broker who can help you determine which plan and carrier will be most suitable to your desires , needs , and budget . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including providing quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It can be overwhelming research Medigap on your own . The best way to choose a Medigap Plan is to work with an independent agent . Trying to navigate the internet is time consuming and actually limits your Medigap choices . However you wish to proceed , make sure you look at a comparison chart and Outline of Coverage for the 10 standardized Medigap Plans . They each have varying benefits . You 'll want to determine which benefits are important to you and which Medigap plan best fits your budget . The two most popular plans are Medigap Plan F and Plan G. Medigap Plan F will cover all the gaps in Medicare coverage . You do n't have to meet any deductibles , co-pays or co-insurance . Medigap Plan G acts just like Plan F -- after you 've met the small $ 147 annual Part B deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F . If you would like assistance in comparing plans and premiums , please contact me . My personalized service is always free .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Will Whole Life Insurance Cost Me ?
The cost of any life insurance policy depends on factors such as age of the person being insured , whether the applicant has health problems or other risk factors , tobacco use , and amount of coverage desired . That being said , Whole Life insurance usually costs considerably more than Term insurance because it is designed to last until death and to create some cash value . In some situations involving very poor health , advanced age , or when a very small face amount is desired , Whole Life can cost less than Term -LRB- if Term is available at all in that situation -RRB- . It is imperative to use a reputable agent or agency who will show you what you can get in your price range and help you weigh out the type and amount of coverage to get to best suit your needs .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
It depends on individual or family circumstance . A better question is how much life insurance is enough ? Remember one reason for Life Insurance is income replacement . Having enough life insurance to ensure a family is protected is usually the best place to start . A term life insurance contract typically provides a large death benefit with a low premium payment . Provide peace of mind knowing your family will be protected then decide if and how much Whole Life Insurance is enough . The term Whole Life means you will be paying premiums your entire , or `` Whole '' life . Having too much Whole Life Insurance might be an issue if the primary breadwinner loses his or her job and can no longer afford making premium payments . This is where Whole Life can be costly . When considering the purchase of Whole Life Insurance it is a long term , risk adverse strategy . Make sure you are able to make premium payments for at least 10 to 12 years regardless of job loss , increase in expenses , etc. . All the risk is transferred to the insurance carrier and the interest crediting provides a guarantee . Plus there is usually a ` dividend ' or return or premium . The only thing the insured needs to do is make sure they make the premium payments . There is no flexibility with these premiums , like Universal Life Insurance . It generally takes a long time to build cash value . For standard products and level premium schedules the break even point for premiums paid equaling cash value accumulation is generally 10-12 years . Always ask your agent questions if you are unsure of how life insurance products work .
What is the best type of life insurance to purchase ? The answer depends on what you want the insurance for and for how long the coverage is needed . Life insurance basically creates cash at death which can be used to create or conserve wealth . There are additional features available depending on the type of plan and how you are planning to use it in your overall financial planning . Here are the main types of life insurance and some factors to consider : Term life insurance As the name implies , coverage is for a specified term : 5 , 10 , 20 , 30 years , etcetera . At the end of the term the term the policy renews at a higher premium . Factors to consider include : how long you need the coverage for , the rate at renewal and if you will need to convert to permanent insurance . Whole life insurance With whole your coverage is for your whole life . The factors to consider include whether the policy is participating and is eligible for dividends or non-participating . In addition the policy guarantees such as premium and cash value . The company financials and dividend history are important considerations especially when considering a participating whole life policy . Universal life insurance Coverage for your whole life if properly managed . This type of coverage offers more flexibility in premium level , insurance cost and investment options . These are all factors to consider . Working with an independent insurance broker , who understands your needs , will help you decide on the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Video Transcript : Next question is , `` What are the best whole life companies ? '' Well , I have to divide that into a couple of sections . One is , what are the best whole life companies for indemnification ? And what are the best whole life companies if you 're using this for supplemental income ? There are several great carriers out there that are really good dividend paying whole life contracts . If you 're using it for indemnification , you want to look at the most benevolent underwriter , because that 's the game that has to be played in permanent whole life , because you 're going to be paying this premium for the rest of your life . So , I want to find out from an indemnification or protection point of view , who gives me the best number because of my health consideration ? The secondary part is , if I 'm using whole life for an actual income play , I want to be able to use whole life and a contract that actually is going to give me more rate of return . And that 's how I look at it ; is it income , or is it indemnification ?
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
There is n't a correct answer to this question , only the answer each individual comes to in regard to their wants and needs . The catch to the decision of when or how much to buy is the longer you wait the more expensive it becomes to purchase . Something to consider that rarely is considered is the purchase of Whole Life insurance is control . A whole life is the one policy where the price is set at the begining and stays that way through the life of the policy . With term the insured does not really control cost the insurance carrier does through the life of the policy . An insurance company can not change or alter a whole life policy without your permission . Since you can combine policies and types of coverage -LRB- it is never all or nothing -RRB- how much whole life is entirely up to you . The split is up to the individual . Some people carry combinations of policies with the idea that they will shed the term as time goes by , ending up with the whole life at the end of a long happy life . Last thought on this subject . An insurance company has less power over the insured with whole life . They have to `` ask '' you and you have to agree to any changes . Where this can be reassuring is if your health changes down the road . I have several serious health conditions and it is good to know my life insurance company can not raise my price or change anything without my say so .
At first I understood the question as Peggy did , then I saw Bob 's answer ... So I 'll address both concepts . Life insurance FOR children is a great idea and a great GIFT ! That is WHole Life - not Term . You can start a policy on a baby for $ 50,000 very inexpensively and by the time they are adult , the policy could well have doubled in face value and grown several thousands of dollars in cash value . That cash could be used for college , to buy a car , etc. . Then the policy could be turned over to the now adult child to continue as protection for their future family , etc. . The amount of Life insurance needed for yourself when you have children has many variables to consider when determining how much is enough . I always recommend to buy as much as you can afford . Again , Whole Life . There are tax advantages , cash value and other benefits that only come with Whole Life . If you also have a spouse in addition to the children you 'll want to consider how much it would take to replace your income . Is there a mortgage ? Do you want to pay for college for your kids ? These things and more should be considered when determining how much is needed . You 're best bet is to consult with an experienced Insurance Adviser to figure out what your needs are , and then to help you find the best company and policy to meet those needs .
Graded Benefit Whole Life Insurance is whole life insurance that pays a reduced benefit during the first one to three years , then pays the full death benefit after that . E.g. . If death occurred during year one or two , it may pay back all you paid in , plus 10 % . If death occurred during year three or afterwards , it would pay the beneficiary the whole death benefit . Different policies are graded a different number of years , and each carrier has their own criteria for how much is paid back during the graded years . Most graded benefit whole life policies are only graded for natural death . I.e. death due to illness or old age . They usually pay 100 % of the death benefit from day one for accidental death . Guaranteed issue whole life policies are graded , and some simplified issue policies are graded . Simplified issue policies are those that do not require an exam . The biggest thing to watch out for with graded whole life insurance is whether the premium stays level for life . Some graded whole life policies have premiums that go up at regular intervals . With some , the company may raise the premiums at any time , as long as they do so for everyone owning that type of policy . If you anticipate living longer than a few years , it is best to buy a graded benefit whole life policy where the premium will stay level for the rest of your life . Please feel free to contact me at any time if you would like to see whether you qualify for an immediate benefit policy , or to get some competitive quotes for several graded benefit policies that have the price locked in for life .
What is the best Whole Life Policy ? While there is no direct answer to this , the best answer is whatever policy will best protect your family . There are different types of whole life policies . The most common is ordinary whole life , also called `` straight Life '' or `` Permanent '' -LRB- cash value -RRB- Insurance . You pay a level premium for the rest of your life , as long as you are making your monthly premiums . The premium never increases and your policy accumulates cash value . How much life insurance -LRB- death benefit -RRB- will you need ? That determines on a number of factors such as : Do you have any children/grandchildren you want to leave money to ? How much of your income does your spouse depend on ? Who depends on you financially ? How much debt do you owe ? Do you want to leave money to your favorite charity ? You want to make sure you buy enough life insurance to cover your financial obligations if an unexpected or untimely death occurs . It is also important your premium fit 's within your budget . Because if you ca n't afford it , it is n't any good for you or your family . An insurance agent is the best person to get with to compare the different types of life insurance and find a policy that best suits your situation . I work with many top insurance carriers with the most competitive rates . I 'll do the shopping for you ! Thank you & Be Well , Mendy Douglas www.iflretirement.com/mendy-douglas/
It is always a good idea to purchase cash value life insurance while you 're young and healthy . Think of it as buying a piece of undeveloped property . You can buy it cheaply and as you hold onto it the value increases over time . Whole life is a valuable asset that works best with a lot of time to work . What really is good about whole life is later in life , when you 're not so young and not so healthy . They ca n't take it back , end it or raise the price . Believe me , as a 53 year old with major health issues the most secure financial tool I own is my whole life insurance . My health as of late , would probably make me uninsurable , so having taken care of that as a younger much healthier man , was one of the smartest things I 've ever done . Also term insurance as you hit your 60 's is not the same product price wise as your 30 's was . It is very expensive and many people in thier 60 's are now looking for low cost term insurance for the next 30 years and are n't finding it . Later in life , term insurance has a way of making whole life purchased at a much younger age a real bargin .
There are three categories of life insurance : Ordinary Insurance , Industrial Insurance , and Group Insurance . When you go to purchase a policy , you are looking for Ordinary Insurance , and it comes in the following types : 1 -RRB- Term Life Insurance This comes in Level term , Increasing Term , and Decreasing Term . But almost all policies sold now are level term , which stay at the same face amount for the full amount of the term . Term Life is temporary coverage that expires at the end of a certain number of years , unless one is able/chooses to renew or convert them . They do not usually have any cash value and if will lapse if premiums get more than a month behind . 2 -RRB- Whole Life Insurance Comes in Straight Whole Life , Limited Pay Whole Life , and Single Premium Whole Life , named after how long one pays the premiums -LRB- the shorter the years one pays the premium , the higher the premium -RRB- . There are also a number of other forms of Whole Life that differ by other features than how long the premium is paid . Whole Life is permanent , stays in effect for one 's `` whole life '' . Has cash value that can be borrowed against or used to pay premiums . If dropped after a certain length of time will have a cash surrender value or can become a reduced paid up policy . 3 -RRB- Endowment Policies Cash values grow rapidly so that the policy endows at maturity and the face amount can be collected , even if still alive . 4 -RRB- Nontraditional Life Insurance Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life , Interest Sensitive Whole Life , and variable products belong in this category . They all have features that make them different from one another , but all have the ability to provide permanent coverage and have cash value .
The price of whole life insurance isdependenton gender , age and health condition of the insured . The premium is paid for the life of the insured or the maturity date of the policy . The vast majority of whole life is participating or generates an annual dividend . A dividend is areturnof unused premium and interest credited to the policy . If the policy owner elects to use the dividend to pay premiums along the way , the overall price for the coverage is reduced . If the economic exposure is perpetual , apermanentpolicy is necessary , but not necessarily participating whole life insurance . Guaranteed universal life may be a better economic alternative . Todetermine how much whole life costs versus guaranteed universal life insurance simply email me your gender , age , smoking status and general health to obtain a estimation on the price tag .
Mortality in the United States stubbornly remains at 100 % . If you want to purchase a life insurance policy in anticipation of receiving a death benefit , then a permanent policy is your sole option . All other policies have a termination date . I am using the term permanent because it includes other policies that share these features with a whole life policy . Death is not the only opportunity for receiving benefits from a permanent life insurance policy . Throughout the existence of the policy you have access to the cash value of the policy . You can either withdraw money or take a policy loan . A policy loan does not require an application and can be taken in total privacy . These loans have assisted business owners through stressful period of time , by providing capital to keep the business afloat . Business owners often use permanent life insurance to make sure that funds are available for surviving partners to purchase the interest of a deceased partner in a business . They also use permanent life insurance in compensation packages . Some people use their permanent life insurance policy in their estate plan to pay taxes and to make sure heirs receive equal treatment . It is an excellent way to give a gift to a university or religious organization . The systematic nature of deposits in a permanent life insurance policy has enabled some people to develop significant wealth . It certainly can form the stable component of an overall financial strategy . The return in a permanent life insurance policy is competitive with other high-quality , fixed return assets and can provide tax free distributions as well as income tax free death benefits . Financial planning is about shifting assets . The most important shift is from current consumption to future consumption . You can make a choice between a low-fat caramel macchiato and money in your future . While certain coffee franchise would take offense that is really be beginning of the process . How much are you willing to invest in your future ? Because of its semi-compulsory nature , a permanent life insurance policy is a great place to start . I havent met anyone yet who honestly told me that they have too much permanent life insurance . Usually they are lamenting the escalating cost of their term life insurance . Today a significant amount of life insurance is purchased by people over age 60 . Can you imagine how they would have preferred to have made that purchase thirty years ago for the cost of a stop at the coffee shop ? Whole life insurance is the fully guaranteed permanent life insurance product . It is the basic policy from which all other forms of life insurance have been developed . Some will hold that whole life insurance is too expensive . However , if you are looking for a lifetime of coverage you will find it is very inexpensive unless you are wildly successful investor . If you look at the sum of premiums alone you will find that by life expectancy that term life insurance will have cost a significantly greater amount of money than the whole life .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Gerber Life Insurance For ?
Gerber Life Insurance started in 1967 as a way of helping children and families protect their future through life insurance . They offer policies for babies , youths , adults , and seniors . One plan is specifically aimed at providing cash value to pay for college , and their Guaranteed Life plan is designed for final expenses . However , any of their plans can be used for any purpose that fits the needs of the insured .
Gerber Life is one of the many insurance companies that offers life insurance benefits - they were rated `` A '' by A.M. Best . They feature a great guaranteed-issue whole life insurance program -LRB- GIWL -RRB- for people between ages 50-80 - there are no health questions and no exam required for the program . The program features a `` graded '' death benefit - in short , a two-year waiting period before the program will pay a death benefit -LRB- unless death occurs under accidental means in the first 2 years , in which the policy will pay the full benefit -RRB- . That 's just an overview of one product that they offer . Gerber offers a wide range of products to fit various needs for individuals .
Gerber life insurance is life insurance provided by Gerber Life Insurance Company . A company headquartered in White Plains , NY and established in 1967 . It is a financially separate entity from the Gerber Products Company , with the same mission - `` help parents raise happy , healthy children '' . Gerber life insurance offers both term life insurance and whole life insurance . They even have signature products that include term or whole life . The Gerber Life Insurance Company currently has a single A rating from A.M. Best , which is consider ` Excellent ' . A.M. Best provides impartial reporting by rating insurance company management , integrity , and financial stability .
Gerber Life Insurance Company is a competitive company when it comes to insuring children . And in fact , for older adults who have medical issues preventing them from getting Life Insurance elsewhere , Gerber is one of the options to consider . Gerber has been around for a long time providing insurance for children . Gerber is one of the many companies we represent as well . Hope this answers your question .
Gerber Life Insurance comes in the basic types of Term and Permanent , which are the types of life insurance that are offered by most life insurance companies . In that respect , getting Gerber Life Insurance , or any life insurance , is usually a good idea . To determine whether Gerber 's life insurance is best for you , compare prices and features with similar policies . If purchasing Whole Life , it is a good idea to talk to an agent so that you understand all the features and variables of each policy .
Gerber Life Insurance Company carries a number of different types of life insurance plans . Therefore , the cost will vary depending on the type of policy , as well as the age of the applicant . You can go to the Gerber Life website to get a quote for the plan that you choose . Keep in mind that there are other No Exam life insurance policies that can be compared to Gerber 's prices to be sure that you are getting the best deal .
You can cancel your Gerber life insurance policy by contacting Gerber Life Insurance Company 's customer service center . They can be reached by phone at their toll free phone number of 1-800-704-2180 . Or you can mail them at Gerber Life Insurance Co , 445 State St , Michigan , 49412 to request the cancellation .
I find Gerber 's prices to be a good deal for children . Gerber also has a guaranteed issue policy that can come in handy for those who do not qualify for other policies . To compare rates of any of the Gerber plans or policies with other life insurance companies , you can go to a website that offers a variety of companies and input your state , date of birth , height , weight , tobacco status , and some medical information . While price is n't everything , it is nice to compare before making a decision .
We carry Gerber , and find that it is very competitive for children and for older adults who are unable to qualify for other policies . Their guaranteed issue life insurance is especially reasonable for that type of coverage if you choose to pay it monthly by automatic withdrawal from your checking account . As with other guaranteed issue policies , there is a graded period where the policy only pays for accidental death , then after two years it will pay the full death benefit for death by any reason . If death occurs in the first two years , it pays back all premiums plus 10 % , which is a better sure return than you can get anywhere else . Where the guaranteed issue Gerber policy might not be worth it is if the insured person lives so long that the policy pays less than the premiums paid in . However , this type of policy is usually purchased by those for whom life expectancy may be shortened due to illness or weight . In my opinion , the risk of not having any coverage would be worse than the choice to purchase a Gerber policy and not need it until many years later .
Gerber Whole Life Insurance , per their website , if offered to persons age 18-65 and in face amounts of $ 25,000 to $ 150,000 . Gerber also uses Whole Life in their Grow-Up Plan . Whole Life insurance is permanent insurance that has cash value . To determine the best Whole Life insurance for you , contact an agent that offers a variety of Whole Life policies to compare features and projected cash values .
For all but their Accident Protection Plan , Gerber Life Insurance covers death by any reason . Life insurance excludes death by suicide during the first two years , and if there is misrepresentation on the application and death occurs during the first two years , there is a chance the policy may not pay the death benefit . Aside from those situations , Gerber life insurance covers death due to natural and accidental causes , as does all traditional life insurance .
Gerber has Whole Life insurance policies for babies to senior ciitizens . Most are under $ 100,000 . Some -LRB- for persons over age 50 -RRB- are guaranteed issued policies . You can get a quote directly from the Gerber website or contact an agency like ours for a quote for guaranteed issue life insurance .
Gerber life insurance company began in 1967 and is rated A -LRB- excellent -RRB- rating by A.M.Best , a third party watchdog agency . Gerber has 40 million in force with 3 million customers and 2 billion in assets under management . It is a small niche carrier in the life insurance market place .
Gerber Life is a `` legitimate '' life insurance company in that it is domiciled in the state of NY and is located at 1311 Mamaroneck Ave. , White Plains , NY , 10605 , 914272-4000 , and is licensed to do business in all 50 states and Canada . They list six product groups on their website , WEBSITELINK , includingthe onlyendowment life policy that is also an adult life insurance policy . It 's called the Gerber Life College Plan and has been their flagship policy for a long time . They are definitely a niche carrier , targeting the parent and grandparent market . Their contracts have many guaranteed features that appeal to those that do n't want to take any chances that their insurance might lapse or diminish in value over time . I have worked with their service teams on a few occasions and they are knowledgeable and very customer-oriented . The have been rated `` A '' , AM Best 's third-highest financial rating , and `` A - '' by Weiss , which is their 3rd best rating as well . Both of those ratings are within the `` Excellent '' range of both rating services . That gives them a Comdex of `` 80 '' , which means that 80 % of all financially-rated carriers are ranked below them . If by `` legitimate '' you are referring to their contracts being of real value , or if can you trust a life insurance company that is also a baby food company , you may want to do more research . From and industry point of view , they are legitimate .
Gerber Life Insurance is an A rated carrier that sells both term and permanent coverage . The Gerber name is well know for baby food and because of that , they have a name in the marketplace that suggests family , safety , etc. . Other than that they are generally involved in the lower tiers of life insurance coverage , and do much of their business through the mail . They also offer several plans that do not require an exam .
Gerber Life is one of the many insurance companies that offers life insurance benefits - they were rated `` A '' by A.M. Best . They feature a great guaranteed-issue whole life insurance program -LRB- GIWL -RRB- for people between ages 50-80 - there are no health questions and no exam required for the program . The program features a `` graded '' death benefit - in short , a two-year waiting period before the program will pay a death benefit -LRB- unless death occurs under accidental means in the first 2 years , in which the policy will pay the full benefit -RRB- . That 's just an overview of one product that they offer . Gerber offers a wide range of products to fit various needs for individuals .
Your question can mean many things . Gerber has an `` A '' rating by A.M.Best , the company most recognized by the life insurance industry . Gerber 's products are generally at the lower end of need for most people as they mainly sell final expense type products . Premiums are generally competitive , and a good independent agent will guide you to the best value for your needs .
It depends on what you call a good deal . If you are looking at starting a life insurance policy on your child to protect them incase of premature death or to guarantee options to buy more life insurance in the future , then Gerber is a nice policy . But with that being said I have to say that I strongly disagree with their latest run of TV commercials that promote buying their life insurance policy as a way to fund your child college . Again in my opinion when you look at the premium that you are paying , how long it will be paid and the cash value that is available when your child is ready to go to college , that statement borders on the line of lying . Funding college no , funding some college books is more like it . Everything really comes down to what are you buying the insurance policy for .
In addition to what Bob has said , I would recommend picking up the excellent government booklet named Choosing a Medgap Policy . You can download it free from the Medicare website or order a paper copy free . Your Medicare Insurance broker can supply you with free copies of these as well . The chart on page 11 -LRB- of the 2012 version -RRB- makes it easier to understand what each Medicare Supplement Plan covers . The hardest thing for most people to accept at first is that the Lettered Plan is what makes the difference in your coverage NOT the brand of the insurance company you buy it from . People start out thinking that AARP 's plan is different from Gerber 's plan or Aetna 's plan . It 's hard for them to accept that the brand makes no difference . It 's the lettered plan that makes the difference . Once you choose which lettered plan you want , then you shop the different companies prices on the plan you choose . Your insurance broker should be able to show you the rates for all the companies that you want to consider .
If there is any cash value in your Gerber life insurance policy , and if you own the policy and are entitled to receive the cash value , then you should be able to cash in your Gerber life insurance policy . Permanent life insurance that has cash value can be allowed to go to maturity , or it can be cashed in before that time . Call Gerber to discuss your options .
end question
start question
home-insurance
When To Buy Home Insurance When Buying A House ?
If you are buying a house , and if you are obtaining mortgage financing to do so , either your Mortgage Broker or your Attorney will provide you with a list of required items that the bank will need in order to schedule your closing . One of the primary items on that list will be a requirement to show proof of insurance on your home beginning at least the date of the closing . More than likely you will also be required to show proof that you have paid the first year 's premium for the insurance in full . The best advice is to contact your Insurance Professional about the property purchase as soon as you can after having your offer accepted by the seller . It is never a good idea to wait until the last minute .
If you are in the process of buying a home , contact your insurance agent . Your insurance agent will need to coordinate with the title company to make sure that the coverage meets the requirements of your lender . The insurance agent will also need to take pictures of the property . Since most homeowners policies are paid through impound transfers from the lender it is critical to coordinate .
Great question . When you buy a new home part of the process of buying the house that you will need to get a title insurance policy issued on the new home . yes the house is new but the lender could have a loan on the property or a title policy will search for that and clear all issues or leans before you buy the house .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show , Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is , `` How does an index insurance product work ? '' Well , let 's say you wanted to buy a house . And you were n't really sure if you wanted to buy it , so you rented the home and you gave them a $ 5,000 check on the side to give you the right to buy it . At the end of the year , you saw the neighborhood decline or you did n't like the neighborhood . You could exercise your right to move out . You 'd lose your $ 5,000 , but that would be it . If you like the house and it appreciated in value , then your $ 5,000 was a good investment and you went ahead and you purchased the home . So depending upon the value , this works similarly in index products . In index insurance products , you have two ways to go . You can use an indexed annuity or you could use an indexed life insurance contract . Both of these work similarly to the posture I 've given you as a basic example of buying and renting a home . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Do you buy running shoes for a marathon form Wal-Mart ???? Do you buy a 4 cylinder truck to pull a trailer that really demands a V8 ? My point is , `` WHO CARES who has the cheapest '' . Yes , there is a way to assess apples to apples when buying home insurance . Red vs. green apples . There are always some differences in policies . However , in my state , there is a vast difference in plans offered . You are buying something to guard your finances in the event of the loss of your home , valuables , or retirement -LRB- that 's called Liability Coverage folks -RRB- . BUY THE MOST you can reasonably afford . I did a quote once and for curiosity I raised our `` in house standard amount of liability '' form 300K to 500K -LRB- the next step up for that carrier -RRB- ... What did I see ???? A ONE DOLLAR difference ... Yes ... ONE dollar . $ 200,000 more in coverage for a buck . That does n't happen for everyone and every carrier . Yet it 's almost always less than $ 10 a month . WOW ... 200K more for $ 10 a month ... . You 'll pay the price if you buy on price . - gravy
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
When you buy a home , condo or town house your mortgage company is not going to let you close on the transaction without protection for their financial investment in your home . That is not going to happen . Should you buy insurance even if you pay for a home with cash and have plenty of resources , you still might sleep better knowing that you are protected from loss . I have run into very few people who are in the this financial category and if they are , they still will buy a homeowners policy .
When you buy a home there are 3 numbers that come into play . The first number is the market price or purchase price . The second number is the assessed value which is what your taxes are based on . The third number is Replacement Cost which is the number used to insure your house . When insuring any home you need to make sure you have enough coverage to rebuild the structure . You do n't have to insure the land because if the house burns down the land is still going to be there . Replacement Cost for older homes is often the highest number because of the cost of materials and craftsmanship .
Great Question . Most of the time and insurance company inspects the outside of the house when you buy a new homeowners policy . Typically they look at the roof of the house , outside paint of the house and the overall condition of the house exterior . Keep in mind you have to take care of the house and keep it in good shape to get insurance .
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
Essentially there are two ways to buy a Medigap plan in Georgia . You can buy direct from a carrier or through an agent . When you buy direct from the carrier you get the same plan at the same rate as buying from an agent . Carriers have in house representatives that can only tell you about their plan . They do n't know about competitor plans and are prohibited from discussing a competitor plans . Once you purchase a plan from a carrier any follow up questions are handled by a CSR rep. When you call you can expect to have an automated service answer your call , following the obligatory `` Press 1 for English '' you will be told to `` Please listen carefully as our options have changed '' . From there you will be routed most often to voice mail . Your call will be returned on their schedule , not yours . You will never talk to the same person twice . Or you can buy from an agent that lives in Georgia and is familiar with plans in your area . Some agents will insist on coming to your home , while others will allow you to purchase over the phone using email and your mailbox . Some agents will only represent one carrier . If you go that route you might as well buy direct . Most agents will represent several carriers and help you understand the pro 's and con 's of each carrier . They will be familiar with rate history and can tell you which ones have a better track record of customer service . There are about 15 or so carriers in GA that offer Medigap . Some only sell direct or through their own representatives . Others use independent brokers that represent several carriers . Maybe a third of carriers make their rates available online but most will only disclose rates if you talk to them direct or through an agent . Hint : Some of the most competitive rates are not found online ... Most of the plans use issue age rating but a few , including the top two carriers -LRB- ranked by sales -RRB- use attained age brackets . You need to understand the difference in pricing structure and rate history if you want to avoid sticker shock on renewal . #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
A Homeowners ' Policy specifically is intended to cover homes that are the primary residence i = of the home owner and named insured . Therefore , if you leave your house , buy or rent elsewhere and then rent your home to another party , if there is a claim at your house , that claim could be denied because you do not live there . Your Homeowners coverage would have to be transferred to a `` Dwelling Fire '' form in order to maintain coverage . Some companies offer these with Liability coverage included , others do not . So be sure to check with your insurance professional . Coverage for any personal property which you may own that is still at that house will need to be picked up on the new Dwelling policy because unlike a Homeowners ' policy , the coverage is not automatic .
When you ask which life insurance is best in Illinois there are a lot of thing to consider . First of all why are you buying the policy ? Are you buying it to pay your house off if you die , to pay for a funeral , to leave your family with extra money to help them re-adjust their life after you die or are you buying it as a retirement vehicle to replace your 401K . When you figure outthe why , then we can start to narrow down which company has that type of insurance to meet your needs . My years of experience has taught methat there is no one company that can meet all the individual needs of every person . I always look at the WHY first , then I can educate you on the different companies that could fit your needs . If you need more help feel free to Skype me or call 630-918-1673
If you have a small house in a low hazard area the premium is low . If you have a small house in a high hazard area the premium is high . If you have a mid size home in a low hazard area the premium is moderate . If you have a mid size home in a high hazard area the premium is higher then the small house . If you have a large house in a low hazard area the premium is high . If you have a large house in a high hazard area I hope you have a good income . Without details there is no way to guess at a rate for any home in any given area .
Just like disability insurance and long term care insurance , the best time to buy critical illness insurance is NOW . The reason why I say this , is because the premiums are based on age . The older you are , the more expensive this type of coverage becomes . Remember the old saying , you ca n't buy fire insurance when the house is on fire . The time to buy is now !
Great question ! Think of it like this . You buy the first house in a neighborhood . If each neighbor is well behaved and keeps up their homes , your happiness level is good ! But if the neighbors are unruly , leave the homes and yards dirty and unkempt , and have regular visits from the police , your happiness level declines . Adverse selection works the same way . If more unhealthy people buy insurance the happiness level of the service providers and insurers goes way down , and costs go way up . If more healthy people buy , than insurers and providers are happy , and costs go down . -LRB- theoretically -RRB- . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Most Home Insurance policies will only cover a vacant or unoccupied home for a short time -LRB- 60 or 90 days -RRB- before they impose coverage limitations . I have seen policies with much higher deductible for `` vacant '' homes . Most wo n't cover burst plumbing or theft/vandalism if the house is ruled vacant at the time of a claim . If you have a vacation home , most seasonal home policies understand that the house will be unoccupied for large periods of time , and address that in their coverage terms . There are vacant home policies that are designed for unoccupied homes . If your home is for sale , or has been unoccupied for a long periodic time I suggest you talk to an insurance agent about getting a vacant home policy . Foremost Insurance and Vacant Express are two companies that specialize in vacant home coverage .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Life Insurance Do I Need And What Kind ?
The amount and type of life insurance you need depends on what you want your life insurance to accomplish . If it is for a temporary need such as getting your kids through college or paying off your house , a Term policy is a reasonably priced way of getting that amount of coverage . If you want to pay for your funeral , a smaller , Whole Life or Guaranteed No Lapse Universal Life policy would be a better choice . You should work with an agent you trust to consider your needs , and who will shop among multiple choices to find your best price for the best policy to suit those needs .
There is no one answer to this question , since it depends on your own variables . That is why you should consult with an experience insurance agent . I urge you to consider : are you married , do you have children , do they live at home , do they have college ahead of them , do you have a mortgage on your home ? What is your income and is it expected to rise in the next several years ? With these variables in mind , you should have anywhere from three to 10 times your annual income in total face value life insurance . And the only way to be sure it will still be there as you get older , is to buy permanent life insurance now . If you feel you can not afford that , at least buy some of term and some permanent , and gradually increase the permanent as you can . Thank you . GARY LANE .
The amount of life insurance depends upon your obligations and your commitment to those that you love . It really isnt a matter of should or ought , the real question is How do I want to be remembered ? So if you dont mind leaving a family saddled with debt , dont buy any life insurance . If you love your family buy enough life insurance that they will be debt free with enough income to make the terrible transition that will take place if you die prematurely .
How much life insurance you need and what kind depends on a number of factors . Life insurance plays an important role in your financial and retirement planning . Life insurance creates cash at death and can also offer tax advantaged growth . The first step is to clarify what you want to accomplish and if the need is temporary or permanent . In a family situation , for example , you might want to replace your income , pay off the mortgage , establish an emergency fund , an education fund , pay fees and taxes at death and/or leave a legacy . In this situation , your advisor can help with the calculations . You can find basic calculators online to get you started . In a business situation , you might want insurance to fund a buy-sell agreement , provide a buffer fund for the death of a key person or as an executive or employee benefit . If your need is temporary , such as covering a short term loan , then a term policy is appropriate . If there is a possibility you may need permanent coverage in the future , you should check to see what conversion options to permanent coverage are available . If your need is permanent , which means that you want the coverage to pay when you die , not if you die before the policy expires , then a permanent policy is appropriate . Whole Life and Universal Life are two types of permanent insurance . Permanent cash value insurance has tax preferred growth that you can take advantage of . An independent insurance broker can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
You should complete a Life Needs Analysis to determine how much life insurance you need . As far as the type of policy , that depends on your budget and whether or not you want temporary or permanent life insurance . Temporary life insurance or Term Life is the least expensive . Permanent life insurance or Whole Life is the most expensive .
That is a GREAT question ! The `` twin '' question to `` how much is right '' , is : `` Which KIND is right '' . There are more than 10 types of Life Insurance : at least 3 kinds of `` Term '' insurance , and at least 10 kinds of `` Permanent '' insurance . Which kind is right for you depends on your goals and needs . That would include your family situation , your financial situation , and what and who you want to benefit . Then when all that is determined the amount of benefit can be determined . A kind of `` rule of thumb '' - taken completely out of context with all the other variables is about 8 to 10 years worth of your annual income . But in reality each situation is unique to the individual client . That 's why personally I take an Education and Fact Finding approach to advising my clients on which kind and how much insurance to implement .
First I 'd like to say that your question , `` Do I need life insurance now that I 'm getting married '' is a mature question that indicates you genuinely care about your future wife and family and are an intelligent thinker ! Good on ya ! The answer to whether you need insurance or not really relies on your financial strength and goals . If you have a few million dollars in liquid assets you probably do n't NEED insurance ... but you may still WANT to have Whole Life , Cash Value life insurance . The wealthiest people in the world typically are the biggest buyers of WL insurance , because of the value it has . On the other hand there are many people who are self insured feeling that the money they have acquired is sufficient to cover the needs of their family in the event of their demise . Obviously those people do n't know what the wealthiest people know about WL insurance . So in order to determine what kind of life insurance you should consider , -LRB- there are over 10 different kinds of life insurance -RRB- , and how much is appropriate , you should consult with a life insurance professional - preferably one who is not tied to just one provider and can help you to implement the program that will be the best for you . If you would like to talk about this further you can call or email me . I 'm only licensed in Hawaii , but I 'm happy to help you with the more important questions .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
You really should n't start out by deciding how much to pay . You should start out by deciding what kind and how much . You may find that you need some term and some whole-life . Once you determine that find out what the price is for what you need . If it 's too much , buy the term only but make certain that it 's convertible to whole-life later .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
The advantages of having life insurance is knowing that your financial obligations will be taken care of and not a burden on your survivor . The disadvantage of life insurance is that for the vast majority the insureds do not match their Survivor 's need for cash upon their death with the ` Right Kind ' of insurance plan . Consider for example : a married insured whose Spouse relies upon their income to sustain the expenses of daily living . What is the ` Right Kind ' of Life Insurance plan and what is the ` Right Amount ' of death benefit ? Term Insurance 's disadvantage is the fact that very few deaths occur in the coverage period . Their need for income remains unprotected . Permanent plan 's disadvantage is the fact that only the wealthy can afford the face amounts required to support a Survivor 's need for lifetime income . Reversionary Annuity by design is the ` Right Kind ' of life insurance plan when Survivor Income is the need . It is much more affordable than Permanent plans and 100 % of the Surviving spouses will receive its benefit .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
The key question concerning life insurance is how much your family needs , then the questions of what kind , and what companies are best for you can be answered . The best process is to contact a local agent who can guide you through the process of determining how much life insurance your family needs , then research the best company options .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
what kind of term life do I need ? Well , first and foremost you need the convertible kind of term insurance . Why ? Because if you miscalculate and have to continue your coverage a convertible policy allows you to purchase a new policy from the company you purchased the term from without having to prove good health . Believe me , this is the most important part of a term policy as it protects you from being wrong about how long you 'll need coverage .
The answer to this is very subjective depending upon your situation , but I 'll try to make it a little more simple . The idea has always been that , when you retire , your need for life insurance decreases . Today , that 's not always the case . It 's much more complicated now , but there are some universal ideas : What is your need for pure death benefit ? How much debt do you have and how long will you have it ? How is your pension , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , etc. set up ? Will the income from this be set up in a way that can provide both you and a spouse with adequate income should either of you die ? If not , how much income do you need to provide in the event of your death ? What will your death cost in terms of funeral expenses , taxes , and estate settlement ? Do you want to have that provided for ? Do you have people or institutions that you want to leave money for ? Will one or both of you need special care ? When you answer these questions and have an amount in mind , it 's time to explore how best to go about setting it up the right way . I 'm not going to go into the type of insurance or any income you may need to offset a shortfall in your retirement . That 's a much larger discussion that I 'll leave for you and an agent you can trust . He/She will be able to talk with you and come up with the program that fits your need and your budget .
That is an excellent question !!!! We could spend a whole lot of time on this , but I 'll break it down to three things . The first : Decide how you want your retirement to look . Travel , quiet home living , move somewhere , what do you want to do to spend your days ? Second , determine what that future will cost you . How well prepared for that future are you today ? How long do you have to make funding it a reality ? What kind of ground do you have to cover to ensure that it can happen the way that you envision it ? The third : Put together a plan that gets you there , or as close to there , as possible . That plan has to account for your risk tolerance , safe financial living in the meantime , and the ability to create the income that you will need . Spend a little time and put together for yourselves a snapshot of where you are , and where you want to be . Once you have that , find an advisor that you can trust , and get started making your dream a reality . If you want to spend a little more time on the details , please feel free to drop me a line , I 'd be happy to help you . Thank you for asking !
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Can Roommates Share Renters Insurance ?
Most renters policies identify a primary insured . A secondary insured -LRB- roommate -RRB- can also be named . The payment for the policy can be handled any way that the customers desire . There are certain legal privileges extended to the primary insured .
There are very few companies that write non-related individuals on the same renter 's policy . This status of delineating coverage is called `` Named Insured . '' The drawback to these policies is that a claim check would be made payable to ALL named insureds ; so if only your stuff was stolen from your vehicle or otherwise damaged , your roommate would also need to sign off on the check before you can cash it . The other drawback is that , in the event of a claim , it goes on the personal history of all named insureds . So if your roommate has a claim , it can penalize YOU for the next 3 to 7 years -LRB- depending on company -RRB- even if you guys separate households . Even if a roommate has no personal property -LRB- i.e. contents -RRB- , a critical component of renter 's insurance is liability . Ideally , each roommate should have renter 's insurance , so that if a guest is hurt on premises , the lawsuit could be filed against the responsible person . Most renter 's policies also include Personal Injury coverage under the liability , but some do not . Personal Injury covers damages to a third party that you may be legally liable for , but where the injured party suffered no physical injuries . The most prevalent claim currently is slander/libel from social media . Refer supra to what I indicated about claim history . Do you really want to be responsible for your roommate 's posts online ? I know I do not . I currently rent myself as it is a better deal where I live than ownership . I do have a roommate , and we each have our own separate policies .
Great Question : Renters insurance covers the named insured and his wife and kids . But for example if you live with a roommate you need to have separate policy for each of you guys . The insurance company wants each roommate to have his own personal renters policy to cover his personal property .
Who owns what in the apartment or home you are renting ? YES , each roommate needs to have Renters Insurance . Your insurance will only cover your material possessions . If you own all of it , then you there really is no reason for the roommate to have the insurance . Be sure to get the replacement value v. current value renters insurance . It will cost a little more however which would you rather have , the value your TV is currently worth or what it costs to get a new one ?
In order for roommates to be covered by renters insuranceroommatesmust be listed on the policy . Many companies will not cover more then 1 roommate so often times each person residing in the property would need to purchase their own renters policy as well . AnInsurancecompany will assume a risk based on the application and does not look to cover what they have not been made aware of . Especially in a liability situation .
There isnt a legal definition for roommate . The person who needs to have a renters policy is the person whose name is on the lease and who has personal property on the premises . The personal property of a roommate is not covered by the policy although it is difficult to establish who owns what . The only person who must have the liability protection is the person on the lease .
No . If you read your policy , you will see in the Definitions Section , the definition of Insured . It would look similar to this `` Insured '' means you and residents of your household who are : a. Your relatives ; or b . Other persons under the age of 21 and in the care of any person named above . If your roommate is not a relative , he is not insured and would receive no benefit from the policy in the event of fire or liability claim . If you were apply for the insurance in your name and your roommates name , and the company issued a policy , then your roommate and you would be covered . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
Renters Insurance will not cover your roommates unless they are also listed on the policy . Renters Insurance would cover your guests but not roommates . Renters Insurance typically covers your personal belonging and protect you against any claims in which you may be liable for . For more information please visit rocoinsurance.com
For the most part , yes , unless you 're married or live with your parent -LRB- s -RRB- . For the property part of your insurance , you must have an insurable interest in the property . The insurance company will only pay the owner of the property in the event of a claim . If you do n't own it , you have no loss . If you 're married , the property is considered to be owned by both so either can collect from a loss . For the liability portion , you must be a named insured or the dependent of a named insured . If you have a roommate and you both get sued , your liability covers you and their liability covers them . Look at it this way , if you 're roommate gets sued for doing something negligent , do you really want that to be your problem ? A good agent will help you choose the right coverages for your situation and build a policy you can afford . Be smart and find an agent you can trust . It 'll save you money in the long run .
Most renters policies identify a primary insured . A secondary insured -LRB- roommate -RRB- can also be named . The payment for the policy can be handled any way that the customers desire . There are certain legal privileges extended to the primary insured .
Some insurance providers may allow you to add a room mate to the renters policy but they must be listed in order to be covered . What is most often the case is each roommate will be required to carry their own insurance to protect their own liability and property .
Renters insurance premiums take into account the value of the property being insured . So your roommates valuables may send your premium up . While a specific dollar amount isnt assigned to each of your valuables , the insurance company will use everything you inventory as insurable to determine the overall price of your policy . So more stuff makes for a higher premium . While you might still think splitting a higher premium is cheaper than paying your own , consider the drama of deciding your portion of the deductible and dividing up the payout . Its most prudent to purchase separate policies in order to keep your finances separate .
Great question ! Typically a policy , whether it is a renters , health or life insurance policy will only cover the person or persons named on the policy . So if you put you and your spouse , you both are covered . If you name your family , then you all are covered . If it is just you , and you have a roommate who is not named , you are covered , they are most likely not . Check your policy and see who is listed , and who they will cover , or call your agent and have them tell you . Thanks for asking !
Roommates should have separate tenant insurance policies . There is no `` insurable interest '' in the property of the other on which to base a legal basis to pay a claim . Moreover , liability of the one without insurance will be uninsured and there are no legal means available to a policyholder to assume liability or transfer rights under a policy .
Yes . If you have multiple roommates , you can all be listed on the same policy . This will save you on the premium . Just beware that if one of you has a claim , it will count against all of you . That may raise your rates for the next few years even if you are not living with the person who filed the claim .
Some companies will cover unrelated individuals living together under the same contract as long as they are each listed in the policy declarations . Some will not . Ask you agent or broker about your specific situation . It is a safe bet that if you take on an unrelated roommate , he or she will NOT be covered unless specifically added to the tenants package policy .
For the most part , yes , roommates should buy their own policies . It is always a good idea to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific laws in your state and terms and conditions of your contract . However , having your pwn policies means that in the event of a loss , there would be less liklihood of having to try to determine which of you owned what .
That is a great question ! Yes , is the short answer . Your roommates insurance company will not pay you for your stuff , or house you , if something were to damage the apartment enough to force you out of it . They will only pay for whomever has the policy , and whatever they have covered under their policy . The rest of you would be out of luck . Nor would they cover your part of the expenses if it was from your apartment that the fire , smoke , water , etc. damage originated . Only the person with the liability coverage will be helped . Protect yourself , and get a policy . They are relatively inexpensive , and can be a Godsend should there be a problem in your home , or with your stuff . Thank you for asking !
No , renters insurance is written to cover the personal property of the insured and their immediate family residing with them . Your roommate would be responsible for purchasing their own renters insurance policy to protect their personal items . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Lesson One A Simple Lesson on How the S&P 500 Works -LRB- Since the AP Has No Clue -RRB- Oct. 4 , 2010 4:34 AM ET | 15 comments | About : SPDR S&P 500 Trust ETF -LRB- SPY -RRB- , IVV , VOO , SSO , SH , SDS For More Info contact I came across this disaster of a story from the Associated Press yesterday : `` Apple May Surpass Exxon As Most Valuable Company . '' Interesting - Apple -LRB- AAPL -RRB- is a monster - but I did n't expect the AP -LRB- that 's Associated Press , not to be confused with AAPL -RRB- to attempt to mis-educate their vast audience with this blatantly false nonsense that shows a thorough lack of understanding of how the SPX works : While Apple CEO Steve Jobs will no doubt be happy about his new perch atop the business world , there 's more at stake here than mere bragging rights . As soon as the total value of the company 's shares edges above Exxon 's , Apple will take over the top spot in the Standard and Poor 's 500 , the market index used by most professional money managers . That means that billions of dollars invested in funds that track the index will have to shift their holdings to reflect Apple 's new weighting . Exxon , meanwhile , may see its share price fall from the same effect . That slide could be accelerated by hedge funds and technical traders who make bets based on the rebalancing of major indexes and would be primed to short the shares of Exxon . '' Reminder : The S&P 500 is a market cap weighted index . That means that larger companies have a higher weight in the index . An S&P 500 index fund will own a certain percentage of the outstanding shares of each company . It does n't take a market expert to understand that when Apple 's share price rises , and its market cap rises , its value in your S&P 500 portfolio also rises ! As an S&P indexer , you do n't have to do a thing . Changes in market cap based on share price movement are automatically self adjusting - after all , market cap = share price x shares outstanding . On a quarterly basis , the S&P 500 rebalances its index based on new share issuance and buybacks -LRB- in other words , changes in shares outstanding -RRB- . For example , when Exxon -LRB- XOM -RRB- buys back shares , S&P 500 indexers will need to sell shares of XOM . If XOM does a secondary offering , indexers will need to buy shares of XOM . So if you own one you need to relax it corrects automatic so you need not worry .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How To Evaluate Health Insurance Plans ?
Obamacare has eliminated most competition in SC and with the regulations of the plans all plan choices are the same . However , deductibles , copays , and coinsurance are the key factors in evaluating the affordability and the value of the plan to each individual or family . ACA plans that are not on the federal exchange such as United Health One have some differences like an HSA plan that is not available on the exchange . Now , you can step outside of the approved Obamacare guidelines and find a plan that offers great protection at a lower premium while accepting the penalty imposed by the Feds for that `` terrible '' decision . For more information on truly affordable plans outside of Obamacare call Ron Hinch , The Hinch Financial Group @ 843-450-9879 '
The two big pieces that everyone looks at when buying an individual health plan these days are the plan metal levels and the premiums . Under the Affordable Care Act , individual health plans are , in short , guaranteed-issue as insurance companies can no longer decline you for a pre-existing condition or other health-related illness . When determining which plan is suitable to you , you need to evaluate your premium tolerance -LRB- how big a check you 're comfortable writing so-to-speak -RRB- , do you qualify for a subsidy , and are you willing to take on more risk to keep your premiums down or do you want to create a more predictable healthcare expense structure . If you qualify for a subsidy , you would want to look at ON-exchange health plans first - subsidies can only be used towards on-exchange plans , not off-exchange plans . These three pieces will point you in the proper direction to start . You can run free instant quotes on my website , TermInsuranceBrokers.com , if you want to compare plans in your area . You may also want to see if your employer offers group coverage and , if they do , see how it compares to an individual plan . Group plans can be great , but the main drawback is that if you leave the company or are terminated , the coverage does n't go with you . Your best option is to review your options with an independent health insurance agent/broker to see which carrier 's plan is going to be the most suitable for your needs . If you 'd like some help with this , send me a message through the `` contact me '' link .
In evaluating Term Life Insurance , make sure that the policy is guaranteed , not just assumed to be guaranteed . By this I mean , check to see if the premium is guaranteed to not go up for the entire term , and that the face amount will not go down for the entire term . Evaluate the life insurance company , to make sure it is rated at least A by AM Best . Finally , evaluate the agency you purchase the policy through , to see if they are trustworthy , have a lot of complaints , and will be available to help you with questions or service requests down the road . Clues as to reputability for online agencies are how long they have been in business , whether they introduce staff members on their web page , if they are part of the Better Business Bureau , etc. . If you cover those three bases , you should make a good choice in term life insurance .
Over the years car insurance providers as well as providers of other insurance solutions , have evolved their underwriting review practices in order to better evaluate the risk they are being asked to insure . Many years ago things like the color of a car or whether it had 2 or 4 doors would affect the premiums paid . These days , hoewever , insurance companies are much more sophisticated intheir evaluation rocedures and many have included credit history when evaluating an applicants ; request . Simnilar to one 's driving record and accident history , a credit report can help an insurance companyu to better understand the risk factors of one 's life style . Thus , a better credit history , along with a clean drigving record , hepls an insurer to feel more confident that they are insuring a person less inclined toward risky decisions .
When evaluating long term care insurance , you will be given a spreadsheet of 2 or more companies ' products to compare . This makes it pretty easy to compare similar features of each policy . You will want to evaluate the companies : their rating , their rate hike history , whether they have a disproportionate number of claims against them . You can check the cost of care in places that provide long term care in your area , to make sure you are not buying too much or too little coverage . And here is a helpful evaluation sheet to examine different features of your policy : WEBSITELINK
To sell your insurance policy , you would contact a company that specializes in `` life settlements '' . They will first evaluate your policy to see if there is any value in it to a potential purchaser . This evaluation also includes an evaluation of you , because they are counting on you passing away within a few years in order to make a profit . If yours is a policy in which they are interested , you will fill out an application and they will see if there is a settlement that everyone can agree on .
You would need to start by contacting a life insurance agent who can assist you in being evaluated for a life settlement . I say contact an insurance agent because he/she may have other options to help you reach your goals or free up some extra cash -LRB- e.g. reducing the face amount -RRB- . If a life settlement does appear to be the best choice , you will be evaluated for life expectancy , and your policy will be evaluated for features that make it desirable to viatical investors . Life settlements work the opposite of life insurance : the shorter it appears you have left to live , the more money your policy is potentially worth to investors . Term policy has no cash value , so investors will only be interested in a policy that has more years left than you are expected to live , and/or is able to be converted to a permanent policy .
Disability Income Insurance evaluates health factors , so the cost of the policy will depend on how the applicant is rated health wise . If a nonsmoker who is of normal weight and has no health history , Preferred ratings can be given . The price also depends on the risk of the occupation , how much income the applicant makes -LRB- and how much of that income they want to replace in case of disability -RRB- , and what bells and whistles they want on their policy . For a 40 year old male office worker who makes $ 60,000 per year , the price can be as good as $ 50 per month for a plan that will last to age 65 .
How to evaluate a long term disability plan ? It all comes down to the definition of what disability is . The best policies use the fewest words to define what disability is . The more words beyond that one sentence are really exceptions to the first sentence . The definition should be short and to the point . That is where you start and actually finish your evaluation . Why ? because the rest of the information does n't matter if you do n't qualify or if your qualification ends after a couple years .
The key to comparing Medicare Part D plans is evaluating the drug formulary . It does n't matter if you have a Medicare Advantage plan that includes drugs or you are evaluating a separate Part D plan , you must compare the drugs on the formulary . Medicare.gov has a drug formulary finder which is beneficial .
A Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- offers great peace of mind when it comes to your health care . Original Medicare Part A and Part B , generally cover 80 % of your Medicare approved amounts for covered medical costs . Medigap Plans will help pay that remaining 20 % by covering the costs of copays , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some people think they do n't need a Medigap Plan because they have n't had any health issues . While that is great news , we do n't have a crystal ball to predict the future . A Medigap Plan that is already in place is there to offer that protection when you need it . If you wait until a significant health issue arises , it may be too late . Medicare Supplement insurance companies use medical underwriting to issue policies . If you 're not in a Guaranteed Issue or Initial Enrollment situation , you will have to answer health questions . Medigap policies do not fall under the Affordable Care Act umbrella , so insurance companies can deny you a policy based on your health . I 'll close with an example of a lady who called me wanting to add a Medigap Plan to her Original Medicare Part A and Part B . She was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mastectomy . As you can imagine , her hospital and doctor bills were substantial and she was looking for some help . I had to share the unfortunate news with her that because of her recent diagnosis she would not be able to apply for a Medigap policy at this time , but possibly in two years we could re-evaluate her situation . That 's quite a bit of time for more bills to pile up . Had she already put a Medigap Plan in place , her savings would be substantial . Just for example sake , a Medigap Plan F might cost someone $ 130 a month or $ 1,560 over twelve months . Still a lot lower than 20 % of a $ 100,000 operation . A couple of the most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. & nbspMedigap Plan F will cover all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any deductibles , co-insurance , or co-pays . Plan G acts just like Plan F after you have met the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you would like more information about the benefits of Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 . You can also visit my website at www.remedigap.com and check out my client testimonials .
A Life Insurance Blood Test evaluates the risk you pose to the life insurance company based on your mortality , which is measured in part with a blood analysis.Here are the chemistry items being evaluated . Glucose , Fructosamine Glycated Albumin -LRB- AGP -RRB- , Blood Urea Nitrogen -LRB- BUN -RRB- , Alkaline Phosphatase , Total Bilirubin , SGOT -LRB- AST -RRB- , SGPT -LRB- ALT -RRB- , Gamma Glutamyl transferase -LRB- GGT -RRB- Total Protein -LRB- Albumin and Globulin . -RRB-
Most insurance companies require the homeowner to carry insurance that covers the cost of reconstructing the home . This can be a great deal different than the current market or assessed value of the home . Companies rely on independent evaluation programs and adjust the amount of coverage annually to reflect the increased cost of reconstruction . Get another evaluation done to see if that is the source of your problem .
Annuities are rated by independent financial rating companies . These companies specialize in evaluating and assigning a rating to different types of Financial Companies & Issuers . The main companies that do this are Standard & Poors -LRB- S&P -RRB- , Moodys , Fitch , A.M. Best , Weiss , & Comdex . It is important to know that each company has it 's own rating scale . And rating scales can also differ depending on which type of financial company is being evaluated . S&P has the easiest to understand rating scale ; AAA , AA + , AA , AA - , A + , A , A - , BBB , BB + , BB , BB - , B + , B , B - then the same for C then D and then F is default .
Although credit is amopng the underwriting tools that a company uses to evaluate a homeowners risk , there are others . Prior loss history , proximity to fire services , certain breeds of pets , amount of dwelling coverage required and alarm systems may also come into play in that evaluation . I have not seen a case where credit alone was a reason for acompany to deny coverage . I have seen many cases where one 's credit score did have an impact on the amount of premium charged , however .
There are thousands of accidents each day across the nation . These accidents are analyzed in great deal to identify the causes and conditions that lead to accidents . The data is evaluated in close detail and in some states the insurance companies can charge by age and sex . Going to that pile of data , they can determine exactly what it costs to insure a large group of 19 year olds with two years of driving experience . In other states , California being one , you are only allowed to evaluate on driving experience , not age . The important thing is that the rate is based on actuarial data . It isnt that someone has an axe to grind against young drivers . Young drivers simply cost the company more to insure .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
How much you pay for supplemental Medicare insurance depends on a number of factors . Medicare supplemental insurance plans are priced according to your age , zip code , tobacco use and plan design . In some situations you weight is also a factor . Supplemental Medicare insurance plan F has the highest rate , but a wise consumer will evaluate different plans with several carriers . In doing so you can save $ 1000 per year or more . #GeorgiaMedicarePlans #GaMedigapQuotes
A life insurance underwriter is someone who evaluates the risk of issuing a policy based on many factors , of which the main one is life expectancy . The person making this evaluation used to write their name under the definition of the risk , thus came the title , `` underwriter '' . It is a very difficult job as life insurance carriers have many regulations to follow , they must charge wisely so their company stays solvent , and they must know a realm of health information in addition to being astute financially . Therefore , there are often underwriting teams , including medical doctors , when a life insurance company covers a broad range of risk . Not only do underwriters look at medical risk , but since 9-11 they also must be sure that the face amount applied for fits the financial means of the applicant , because life insurance can be used by terrorists for money laundering . They look at pharmacy records , driving records , and MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- . Some policies do not require any exam or medical records , some skip the exam but still have the option to order medical records , some just order exam and rarely order medical records , and some routinely order both . All these steps together ensure that the proper rating is given and that the life insurance company will be able to pay all out all its claims .
The question , `` How do I determine how much life insurance do I need '' is one that should be asked by everyone and re-evaluated every year or so . Why ? Because things and circumstances change . There are a number of formulas that are popular with insurance sellers , so the answer you get will depend on who you ask . I would ask you , `` how much do you need for WHAT ? '' In other words : what is your goal for your insurance ? If you have over $ 5.2 million in assets you may want your life insurance to protect your heirs from the tax liability of your estate . If not and your mortgage and credit is all paid off , you may just want your beneficiary to be able to maintain the life style you 've provided for them for the rest of their life . If you still have a mortgage and credit bill you may want to make sure those are all paid in the event of your demise . Or your `` what '' may be a combination of things . That is why you need to work with an agent who will truly look out for your best interests and ask you the right questions .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Can You Sign Up For Medicare Part A ?
You can sign up for Medicare Part A in the three months before your 65th birthday , the month of your 65th birthday , or the three months after your 65th birthday . if you are receiving Social Security benefits when you turn 65 , you will be automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A and B .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B at the same time that you sign up for Medicare Part A , or you can wait to sign up for Part B until you have stopped working and no longer have group coverage . If you are receiving Social Security benefits , you will be signed up for Part A and B automatically just before your 65th birthday .
If you are age 65 and have begun receiving Social Security benefits , you will automatically be signed up for Medicare Part A and B . You can sign up for an Advantage Plan or get Medicare Part D -LRB- or other letters -RRB- at that time , as well . You sign up for Medicare by visiting your local Social Security office , going to Medicare.gov -LRB- where you will be directed to a website where you can sign up -RRB- , or calling 1-800-MEDICARE .
If you signed up for Medicare Part A & Part B during your initial enrollment period , then your effective date will be either the first of the month you turn 65 -LRB- this is the case for most individuals -RRB- or 2 or 3 months after -LRB- if you signed up after the month you turned 65 -RRB- . If you decided to wait because you were still working -LRB- e.g. on a group health plan through your employer -RRB- , then you may be eligible for a special enrollment period and set up an effective date for the first of the following month -LRB- you 'll likely need to complete the Part B enrollment at your local social security office -RRB- . If you decided to wait on signing up for Part B and do not have a special enrollment period , then you would be looking at signing up during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . If you 're signing up during this window , then your effective date would be July 1 .
You can also go to the website for the Social Security Administration at www.SSA.gov for information and to sign up . One important thing to remember when signing up for Medicare in Texas is that you have a one time open enrollment period when you first sign up for Medicare Part B . This means there are no health underwriting questions and you can select any Medicare Supplement plan available . Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of your medical costs . The Medicare Supplement is designed to cover the remaining 20 % or some variation depending on what plan you go with . We have helped many clients through the Medicare Supplement process in Texas . You can compare Texas Medicare Supplement Plans instantly on our website at SummitMedigap.com or give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 .
The main way to qualify for Medicare is to be turning 65 year sold . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care .
Qualifying for Medicare , in general , is a pretty simple and straight-forward process - the most common way people qualify is by turning age 65 . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov , or at your local social security administration office . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care . You may also want to look into adding a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan as well if you would like to have your coverage for prescriptions as well .
You can decline Medicare part A with several restrictions . You can not get Medicare part B without having part A. Additionally , you will face a significant penalty for signing up after age 65 if you do decline Medicare part A . The one time individuals should decline Medicare part A is if they continue to work beyond age 65 and have employer provided health insurance . In that circumstance , the individual can sign up for Medicare when they retire , leave the company , or lose employer coverage with no penalty . Contact your company HR or local Social Security office for details . The company will normally provide a document to the Social Security Administration that the individual have employer coverage up until a certain date . It is important to start the process at least three months prior to your retirement .
You can sign up for Medicare online at medicare.gov . If you are nearing age 65 , you can sign up in the three months before or after the month of your 65th birthday . If you would rather sign up by phone , you can call 1-800-MEDICARE -LRB- 1-800-633-4227 -RRB- . Or you can go to your local Social Security Office to sign up for Medicare .
Everyone should sign up for Medicare Part A & Part B when you 're first eligible -LRB- generally this is when you 're turning 65 years old -RRB- so you do n't get hit with any late enrollment penalties -LRB- there are ways to avoid the late enrollment penalty such as signing up when you 're coming off group health insurance -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you begin your initial open enrollment period -LRB- a 6-month timeframe -RRB- to apply for a Medicare supplement policy with no medical underwriting . You can apply for Medicare benefits on the social security administration website , ssa.gov . If you need quotes for Medicare supplements , send me a private message and we can go over the input so we can find the program that 's right for you .
You can buy into Medicare after age 65 . There is a general enrollment period between January 1 and March 31 of each year during which you can sign up for Medicare . If you are not eligible for free Medicare Part A , the premium you pay may be higher than if you had signed up at age 65 . However , if you did not sign up for Medicare Part A and/or B due to being covered by a group health plan , you can enroll without penalty in the 8 month period after your quit working or the group coverage ends .
Most people receive Medicare Part A premium-free because they have been paying Medicare taxes during their working life and met the 40 quarters requirement -LRB- equates to 10 years of working life -RRB- . Anyone who does not meet the qualifications for premium-free Medicare Part A would have to buy the coverage - the premium for Part A is $ 426 per month . The premium-free Part A requirements are : 1 -RRB- You 're 65 or older and you 're receiving social security retirement benefits -LRB- or are eligible for receiving them , but have n't elected to take them yet -RRB- , or you or your spouse had Medicare-covered employment through the government . 2 -RRB- If you 're under 65 and have been receiving social security disability benefits for 24 months or have ESRD -LRB- end-stage renal disease -RRB- and meet certain requirements . So if you do not meet these any of those items , you 'll have to pay for the coverage . If you 're subject to paying the Part A premium and are under 65 , you may want to look at an individual health insurance plan on the health insurance exchanges instead . If you 're signed up for Part A , you 're likely signed up for Part B as well -LRB- Part B requires a monthly premium -RRB- . If so , I would suggest adding a Medicare supplement plan to cover the gaps in Part A & Part B. I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medicare supplement programs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B late , but there may be penalties . If you do not enroll in Medicare Part B when you first become eligible , you can enroll during the open enrollment period from January 1 and March 31 each year . If you sign up during this period , your plan will become effective July 1 . You will be charged an additional 10 % on your premium for every 12 months you went without coverage . However , if you did n't enroll because you were covered by a different insurance plan , you can sign up during the eight months following the end of that plan without a penalty .
You can postpone signing up for Medicare if you prefer to - most people who do this are still working and on their employer group health plan . Even if you 're still working and on group coverage , once you retire/leave your group plan , you 'll have a special enrollment period to sign up for Part A and Part B -LRB- a.k.a. Original Medicare -RRB- . Part A is premium-free for most people so they 'll start this one up regardless when they turn 65 . If you 're not on a group plan , keeping an individual health plan will be very expensive . If you want to have healthcare coverage and are 65 or older , a combination of Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- , a Medicare supplement plan , and a Part D plan will offer a very predictable healthcare expense structure .
Most people will receive Medicare Part A without paying a premium . If you , or your spouse , paid Medicare taxes during your working years you may not have to pay a premium for Part A. Others will be required to pay up to $ 441 in 2013 . The Medicare Part B premium for 2013 for most people is $ 105 . If you fail to sign up for Part B when you are first eligible you may be required to pay a late enrollment penalty of up to 10 % per year for every year you were eligible but failed to sign up . Higher income individuals may pay a penalty . In determining your penalty premium , Medicare considers your income from prior tax returns -LRB- from 2 years ago -RRB- . The penalty plus base premium is graduated based on income and can be as much as $ 335 in 2013 .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to the website medicare.gov . There is an online form that explains about Medicare Part B and allows you to sign up right there . Or you can visit your local Social Security office to sign up , or call Social Security at 1-800-633-4227 .
You can sign up for Medicare Part D when you turn 65 . If you are already 65 but have not previously gotten Part D because you had credible drug coverage from your employer , and you are now losing that coverage , you can sign up within 60 days of losing that coverage . There are other exceptions in which you can sign up throughout the year , but if you do n't have a `` Special Enrollment '' situation , then you would have to apply during open enrollment , which is Oct 15 - Dec 7th .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B online at medicare.gov . The website offers information about when and how to apply , along with a form that you can fill in and submit online . If you would rather call to sign up , you can call Social Security at1-800-772-1213 . Or you can sign up at your local Social Security office .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How To Claim Disability Insurance Benefits ?
To claim disability insurance benefits , first of all , review your policy and become re-acquainted with its features . Also review the list of qualifying causes of disability , so that you can see if you indeed have a claim . Your policy will spell out how to file a claim . Be sure to follow the instructions and keep copies of everything . Keep notes if you speak on the phone with representatives with the insurance company . Ask your doctor to assist you by spelling out your condition in medical record notes .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
I presume that you have purchased a long term disability policy as this is the logical precursor to being able to file a disability claim . Assuming this to be the case , then you or a friend or family member should contact your insurance agent or the insurance company you purchased your disability policy through and inform them that you have had a disabling event and need to file a claim . If your disability policy is provided by your employer you may want to contact your human resources department to start the claims process . In either event , you will be sent a claim form to complete and return to the insurance carrier . You should expect that the insurance carrier will request medical documentation of your claim of disability and perhaps the circumstances surrounding the cause of your disability . If you were charging people to watch you attempt to jump over the Grand Canyon in your Mini Cooper you may find that your disability claim will be denied due to an exclusion in your policy . Depending upon the how your disability policy was structured there will quite likely be an elimination or waiting period before your disability payments will begin . This period will vary depending upon the waiting period you selected when purchasing your policy . A 90-day waiting period is quite common but it could be 6-months or even a year . This is why some people purchase both Short Term and Long Term Disability policies . A Short Term Disability policy that kicks in on day one of an accident or after a week of an illness and that runs for 90-days or 6-months combined with a Long Term Disability policy with a 90-day or 6-month waiting period can often be less expensive and trying to purchase a Long Term Disability policy with a very short waiting period .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
When calculating your disability insurance amount you must take into account a few factors . The first factor is how much money you will need to draw every month in case of a total disability whether it is from an illness or an injury . Most plans will limit your maximum monthly benefit to 70 % of current income and most will reduce your benefit when you become eligible for SSI which is the federal disability program through the US government . Next factor to consider will be how long can you live without drawing a monthly benefit ? This is the elimination period . An elimination period can be 30-60-90-180-360 days before you begin to receive benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower your monthly premiums . If you find you need benefits in less time than 30 days , it may be necessary to purchase a short term disability plan as well as a long term disability plan . The last factor to consider is the benefit period or how long you need benefits to pay in case of a total disability . Benefit periods can be as short as 2 years or can reach out to age 67 years old with many options in between . I highly recommend using an independent experienced disability broker to help you build the proper coverage for your unique situation at the best price possible .
Disability Insurance will qualify for a business expense if the business pays for the policy and does not receive any of the benefit received . However the employee of the business will need to report any disability income benefits received as taxable income . The same holds true if a professional such as a physician or dentist is incorporated and has a salary or wage continuation plan in the corporate minutes . The corporation may pay for the policy but any benefits received are taxable as income . How premiums for coverage can be changed from year to year . For individual disability policies , in the event of a claim , whether benefits are taxed or not depends on how the premiums were paid during the year of claim . For group disability polices there is a three year look back for premiums . Overhead/practice expense disability policies are always tax deductible and benefits received by the business/practice are not taxable .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
You would have to refer to your policy to determine what it may pay in the event of a claim . There are three policy features that impact claims payments . The elimination period describes how long you must be disabled before benefits begin . The monthly benefit amount describes how much the policy pays while disabled . The payment duration describes how long benefits payments continue . Every policy has different combinations of those three basic elements .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Disability Insurance benefit is based on your current monthly income . You should calculate how much your current monthly expenses are and determine the net benefit needed . If you have Disability Insurance through your employer then you will need to determine if the benefit is pretax or post tax . A pretax benefit paid by your employer means that you will be taxed when you receive benefits . Your net benefit would be substantially lowered after you pay taxes . You can supplement your work policy with an Individual Disability policy to make up the difference to meet you monthly expenses . An Individual Disability policy is underwritten by the company so will have to qualify based on health , age , tobacco , your occupation , and amount of your monthly income . Each company will have limits as to how much of your income you can cover with your policy . The percentage is usually between 67 % and 70 % . You should work with an Independent Agent and determine the best option for you . They will need to know your expenses , income , and the amount of benefit needed . The Agent will need to look for the company that best fits your desired benefit .
Disability insurance is one of the most under sold insurance products in the market . The fact is an average person is 8 times more likely to become disabled than to die . It can have an expensive premium depending on your underwriting class , but at claim time you will be glad you purchased it . Most people depend on the US government for their disability benefits known as SSI through their Social Security . This process takes a minimum of 9 months to complete and most folks are in dire straits financially before receiving their benefits . I would suggest at a minimum purchasing a short term disability plan . This plan will have a shorter elimination time and pay benefits faster in case of an illness or injury so severe you can no longer work . A good long term disability will coordinate with your SSI to pay benefits as far out as 67 years old and up to 70 % of your income . Also buyer beware of cheaper accident only disability plans . Statistically 90 % of all worker related long term disability claims are illness related not injury related
When this question is asked I am not sure if you mean the best insurance company with coverage 's and claims or the who has the best rates . Let 's address rates first : There is no company who has the best rates as there are many varying factors that can make one insurance company rise to the top over another as it pertains to premium . In other words who has the best rate for me may not be the best for you , and we could live right next door to each other . Now lets move on to the more important issue and that is coverage 's : What you have to understand is most insurance companies have varying options/packages of coverage 's available to purchase . In most cases agents tend to offer the cheapest package which does not maximize coverage 's that are potentially available to the client . I suggest when shopping for insurance that you truly consult with your agent about the different options available by an insurance company so you can make an educated decision on the coverage you wish to purchase and how much of the risk you yourself wish to assume . As an independent agent I am able to offer quotes and coverage 's from multiple companies to help my clients make the most informed decision about their most important asset , and that is their home . Now the next subject would be claims : Which insurance company continues to rise to the top in claims handling . There are many independent websites which you do a quick search on and find ratings on how well claims are handled and their overall customer satisfaction and loyalty . There are many companies that are great in the claims area that I bet you have never even heard of . You will also find negatives on every insurance company out there without exception . Most of the negatives are due to coverage 's not being in place that the client thought they had . Or in other words . A lack of understanding their policy . This goes back to my suggestion on being educated on the coverage 's available to you . There are many independent online reviews available to you -LRB- some good , some not so good -RRB- that will give you ratings on how well the claims experience is for clients and how insurance companies rank in the claims department . But there is one thing that I believe is very critical to the claims process and that is your agent . An absentee agent can make the process very frustrating if you are having some communication difficulty with the insurance company . An agent that is actually working for you can help make any unfortunate claims experience must less painful then it needs to be . So never take the agent out of the equation when shopping for homeowners insurance . So with all that being said , my parting advice is do your research , consult and ask lots of questions from your agent . Do n't be shy are think it 's a dumb question because it 's not . After all , were talking about your home .
Right Peggy !! The `` death benefit '' inside a disability policy is usually limited to a few months worth of the `` Monthly Benefit '' . So if your benefit is $ 3,000 a month , then you might get 3 , 6 , maybe 9 thousand in a death benefit . LOOK AT THE LANGUAGE . Does it pay ONLY AFTER you have met an elimination period or is it an immediate benefit ? Disability is a very important plan to own . Yet , I know that buying life insurance , buying disability , buying long term care , buying critical illness , & then buying home , auto , umbrella , & more can be very overwhelming ... . You might consider buying a Living benefits & / or Hybrid Life insurance plan ... These are life insurance plans that you can use BEFORE you die . I have a massage therapist that owns a plan with a death benefit , a $ 30,000 critical illness benefit , and has a $ 1000 a month disability benefit . She pays about $ 43 month for all of this . PERFECT for single mom with a modest income . YES ... standalone Disability has more features and better terms ... yet the all in one plan allows her to cover a critical illness , a disability , & early death . Reach out with questions :--RRB- - gravy
The two primary differences between long and short term disability are the policy elimination periods , and the policy benefit duration . The elimination periods describes how quickly benefit payments begin after the policyholder becomes disabled . Short term policies have much shorter elimination periods . The benefit duration describes how long payments will continue while the policyholder is continuously disabled . Short term policies may have a benefit duration lasting up to 24 months , while long term policies may have a benefit duration lasting to age 65 .
Yes . Many individuals will set up a short term disability policy as well as a long-term disability policy to cover different types of scenarios -LRB- e.g. if you become permanently disabled vs. being temporarily disabled -RRB- . Some individuals will have a group DI policy through an employer and supplement it with an individual DI policy if they feel the group DI does n't provide enough benefits or a very good `` definition of disability '' -LRB- the most important factor with DI coverage -RRB- - when buying disability insurance , make sure of -LRB- and understand -RRB- the definition of disability that 's being cited in the program -LRB- own occupation , modified , or gainful - this is the most important factor in your disability policy as it will determine if you are eligible for a claim when something happens -RRB- . Please note , disability insurance policies coordinate benefits so there 's a limit to how much coverage and what kind you can secure -LRB- most carriers will keep it to a maximum of 70 % of income - the percentage can vary by insurance company -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help setting up coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The things to look for in a disability insurance policyare as follows : 1 -RRB- Is it short term -LRB- under 6 months -RRB- or long term -LRB- at least 2 years -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long is the elimination period -LRB- how long until you start getting paid benefits -RRB- the most common are 30-60-90-180-360 days ? 3 -RRB- How long is the benefit period -LRB- how long do they benefits pay for -RRB- common benefit periods are 2-5-10-20 years or age 65 or age 67 ? 4 -RRB- What is the rating class of your occupation -LRB- 1A-5A -RRB- the lower the number the higher the premium ? Blue collar versus white collar occupations 5 -RRB- How much does the benefits reduce when you become eligible for Social Security benefits -LRB- there are riders toincrease that reduction -RRB- ? I would highly recommend using an experienced independent broker to find the right coverage at the best price for your unique situation . 5 -RRB-
You can always change insurance companies , there 's nothing to stop you . However , you may want to stick with what you have during a claim . Legally , an insurance company has to settle claims according to their policy whether you 're still insured with them or not . In practice , these are human beings working on your claim and they may not always give you consideration if you 've cancelled your coverage with them . Let 's look at an example . Let 's say you 've gotten into an accident and you 're car is in the body shop . You want OEM parts installed on your car , but the insurance company wants to use aftermarket parts because they cost less . They have more of an incentive to honor your request if you 're still insured with them because they see an opportunity to offset your claim with future premiums . Another factor to consider is the company you want to go to . They may not want to insure a car that has unrepaired damage . It 's totally up to the company . Now , in my experience , you would only ask the question if you do n't like how your claim is being handled . If you were totally satisfied , you would n't think about switching . My advice is to stay with your current company and negotiate with their claims department to get your claim settled to your satisfaction . Check your policy , all companies have an appeals process if you do n't agree with how your claim is being settled . Take advantage of it . You may get some consideration and a better settlement . If you 're still unsatisfied , you can always consider the courts , but this is a risky proposition unless you 're sure you 're in the right . After your claim is settled , you can explore new companies . A good agent will help you with claims if you 're not satisfied . They can not always ensure you 'll get what you want , but a good one will go to bat for you . In my opinion , finding the right advisor is the most important decision you make . In the long run , you 'll come out ahead even if they 're more expensive now . The cost of your coverage is n't just the premium , it 's what it costs you in time , money , and aggravation at claim time .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Pay As A Secondary ?
The only time I am aware that Medicare is secondary is when you are covered under and employer group health plan if there are more than 20 full time employees . I always advise people in that situation to take out the Part A of Medicare and delay getting both Part B and Part D until you retire or come off your employer 's group health plan . You do not need Part B or Part D as long as you are covered under an employer plan . The Part B premium this year for new people enrolling in Medicare is $ 121.80 and you do n't need Part B if you are covered by your employer since the employer coverage is primary . You can go ahead and enroll in Part A of Medicare because it is free .
There are situations where Medicare is the designated secondary carrier . Most common is where you or your spouse is covered under an employer group health plan and the employer has 20 + full time employees . The group plan is primary , Medicare is secondary . That does not mean Medicare will pay anything towards the claim . The two plans coordinate .
If you are still working and your employer allows you to stay on the group coverage and you are 65 and enroll into Medicare then your group insurance is primary and medicare is secondary . What if you have medicare and medicaid-medicare pays first . What if you have retired and you have coverage through the group plan-Medicare pays first . What if you are disabled but your spouse is still working and you are covered by the grou plan-if fewer than 100 employees - Medicare pays first-if more than 100 employees-the group plan pays first . What if you have End Stage Renal Disease-during the first 30 months the group plan pays first and medicare secondary ; afgter 30 months Medicare pays first and the group plan is secondary . If you have End Stage Renal Disease AND Cobra - first 30 months Cobra is primary and medicare is seondary and after first 30 months Medicare is primary and Cobra is secondary . If your case is not shown just ask if your case is preimary or secondary on the internet
If you are talking about being covered by group health insurance and also covered by Medicare then it will depend upon the size of the employer group you are working for . If your employer has less than20 employees then Medicare is the primary payer -LRB- pays first -RRB- and the group health insurance pays in a secondary capacity . If your employer has more than 20 + employees then the group health insurance plan pays first and Medicare pays in a secondary capacity . This is the simplest and generally most common scenarios where this question comes up . However , there are numerous other situations a person may be in -LRB- eligible for Medicare and Medicaid , disabled , retired and still covered under a former employer 's plan , etc. -RRB- where other primary vs. secondary payer rules come into play that are too numerous to go into here . For more detailed information I would recommend that you go to Medicare.gov as they are an excellent resource for detailed information on the entire range of these issues .
No , Medicare is not always primary . If you are still working and have group coverage then Medicare could be secondary . If your employer has more than 20 employees then your Medicare would be secondary . In most cases , however , Medicare is primary . If you have a Medicare supplement , the supplement is secondary .
Secondary market annuities offer fixed term payment streams from top quality insurance carriers . The high quality creditworthiness of the insurance carriers usually translates to lower returns to the investor , however secondary market annuities come with yields one to four percent higher than comparable assets . The term secondary market annuity has become an industry standard referring to a factored structured settlement , previously owned annuity or in-force annuity . Secondary market annuities offer all the benefits of the primary market , period certain , guaranteed yield annuity.Simply put , secondary market annuities offer higher returns without additional risk . Hope this Helps Tyson Wright SMA Hub , Inc. .
If you have group coverage you may not need to pick up Medicare part B right away depending on the size of your group . Medicare coordinates with your health insurance . For smaller groups it will be primary , for larger groups it would be secondary . Primary means that Medicare pays first and your health insurance would act like a supplement . Secondary means that your insurance pays first and Medicare would just help pay any deductibles and copay 's . You do not need a Medicare supplement if you have group health insurance in most cases . If you have prescriptions covered at work do not pick up a Medicare Advantage plan or prescription drug plan without discussing it with your HR rep. You could get knocked off your group coverage and not be able to get it back .
Yes , you can have both Medicare and VA Benefits . One plan will be a secondary payer . Since the Veterans Administration benefits must be used at VA facilities , usually Medicare is secondary to the VA insurance . However , sometimes VA drug benefits are a good supplemental plan to Medicare , and thus becomes the secondary payer .
If your only health insurance plan is Medicare , then Medicare is primary . When you have a Medicare supplement plan , Medicare is primary and your Medigap plan is secondary . If you have coverage under an employer group health insurance plan , and the employer has fewer than 20 employees , Medicare is primary . If there are 20 or more employees , the group plan is primary and Medicare is secondary .
For most persons , Medicare is your primary insurance . That means it is your coverage that pays first , up to the limits of benefits you have . If there are additional expenses that Medicare does not cover , you can have a secondary carrier that will pay some of those expenses . It is also possible for Medicare to be a secondary carrier . One example would be in specific instances where your employer -LRB- or spouse 's employer -RRB- provides healthcare coverage . Then , that coverage would pay first .
If you do not have group coverage or you work for a small employer then Medicare is primary and any other insurance is secondary . Larger employers group coverage would be primary and Medicare secondary . The cut off is 20 employees . More than 20 , group pays first , less than 20 Medicare pays first .
In most cases , Medicare is primary and COBRA is secondary . But there are situations where your COBRA plan would be primary . If you are on Medicare as a result of ESRD -LRB- end stage renal disease -RRB- the role is reversed and COBRA is primary , Medicare secondary . You can review the Medicare publication `` Who Pays First '' for more detail .
There are specific situations where Medicare is secondary to a primary coverage plan . The most common one is when you , or your spouse , are covered under an employer group health insurance plan and that employer has 20 or more full time employees . The group plan is primary , Medicare secondary . The two plans coordinate . In most cases Medicare will pay little or nothing .
The factors that determine whether Medicare is primary or secondary are involved . E.g. For a business that has over 20 employees eligible for health insurance , Medicare is usually primary for those age 65 and older . If the business has under 20 employees , the employer 's plan is primary . You can go to this website to find out if Medicare is primary or secondary payer in your situation . WEBSITELINK . You could also call 1-800-MEDICARE to ask about specific situations .
In most situations the answer to your question is based upon the size of the employer group . If the group has on average 20 or fewer employees then Medicare is the primary payer in a dual coverage situation -LRB- Medicare + group coverage -RRB- . If the group has more than 20 employees then the employer 's insurance coverage is in the primary pay position and Medicare is secondary . This covers the vast amount of situations . As with every government program there are other rules and thresholds that can apply in a variety of other situations to numerous to list here . One that may be encountered by some people is when they or a covered dependent become disabled . In that circumstance , for employers with an average of 99 or fewer employees then Medicare is the primary payer on that disabled person and the employer 's group plan is secondary . For more information or advice feel free to contact me .
A secondary beneficiary for life insurance is also called a contingent beneficiary . A secondary beneficiary is not the same as being the second primary beneficiary listed . If there is more than one primary beneficiary , the death benefit is split among the primary beneficiaries . A secondary , or contingent , beneficiary only receives the death benefit if all primary beneficiaries are deceased .
By `` dual health insurance '' I will assume you are referring to a situation where a husband and wife each hold jobs with different companies and both jobs offer health insurance . Dual coverage almost always is a waste of money . Health insurance has a COB -LRB- coordination of benefits -RRB- clause that is designed to prevent overpayment . When a claim is submitted each carrier decides who is primary and that carrier pays first . The secondary carrier then reviews the claim and pays their portion if there is any liability . More often than not the secondary carrier pays little or nothing but between the two they will not pay more than 100 % of the claim amount . In other words , you will not `` profit '' on the claim and COB often is a delay and hassle .
An individual can have two health insurance plans at once , but they probably wo n't receive any additional benefits . The most common time this occurs is when a person is covered with their own employer 's insurance and also covered by their spouse 's policy . In this case , the insurance with their own employer would considered primary and the spouse 's policy would pay little to nothing . Another instance may be a person that retires from the military and gets insurance through their new employer . The individual would need to speak to the veteran 's affairs office for details on this situation . The final way a person may have two insurance plans is when they are covered by Medicare and a secondary insurance such as a Medicare Advantage plan . In this example , Medicare would be the primary insurance and pay approximately 80 % of medical costs . The secondary insurance would then go into effect and cover the remaining 20 % according to the rules of the individual policy .
Original Medicare -LRB- Part A & Part B -RRB- generally covers approximately 80 % of your health care expenses . A Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan can cover gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- up to or all of the remaining 20 % , depending on the plan -RRB- . This is the optimal structure for many individuals . Plan A and Plan C are usually available Medigap plans for people under 65 on Medicare , but the premiums can be much more expensive than when you 're 65 or older . An alternative option would be a Medicare Advantage plan . I would recommend consulting with an insurance agent/broker to compare Medigap and MA plans that are available -LRB- and see if you have a special enrollment period available for Medicare Advantage plans - if you do n't have a special enrollment period , you would have to wait until the Annual Enrollment Period -LRB- October 15-December 7 of each year -RRB- to enroll in one -RRB- . For individuals on Medicare who are 65 or older , they would likely only have a group plan through an employer -LRB- if they 're still working -RRB- to provide secondary coverage -LRB- although the group plan may pay first and Medicare pay second -RRB- . Under this scenario , you would likely only have secured Part A and not Part B of Medicare as Part B requires monthly premiums - Part A is generally premium-free for most individuals . The premiums for a traditional under 65 health plan for someone 65 or older would be substantially more expensive than setting yourself up under Part A , Part B , and securing a Medigap plan or enrolling in a Medicare Advantage plan .
In many situations , Medicare is the primary payer for Medicare claims . If you only have Medicare , or Medicare plus a Medicare supplement plan , Medicare is primary and your Medigap plan is secondary . If you are also covered under an employer group health insurance plan , and your employer has fewer than 20 full time employees , Medicare is primary .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Is It For Life Insurance ?
How much life insurance costs depends on a number of factors including your age , health , smoking status , `` dangerous '' hobbies , etc. . There are many online quoting services where you can check out the rates for different types of insurance . For your specific needs , working with a independent insurance broker , who has access to several companies can help you get the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community . .
Life insurance costs vary according the age and health of the applicant -LRB- among other factors -RRB- , and also according to what type of life insurance policy you purchase . If you just want something that will last a few years and not build up any cash value , the cost of the policy will be much less than if you want to use the policy as a source of cash and protection until death . Discussing your options with a licensed agent will help you determine what type of policy or policies to get , and what the cost will be .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
Great question there are several way 's to determine how much coverage you need example : you could count how many pieces of clothing you own and determine how much each piece cost you when you purchased the item like a pair of jeans $ 100 times the number you own , how much did you pay for your TV -LRB- S -RRB- , if you own the appliances and your furniture . Most people do n't realize how much they have invested in every day household items it is good idea to keep track of your purchases especially big ticket items . A good independent agent can help you determine the right amount of coverage for your needs also is good idea to video your Home/Apartment and catalog serial numbers and save receipt 's .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
Some agents may say that 5 % -LRB- or maybe 7 % and even up to 10 % -RRB- of your annual earnings should be allocated toward life insurance premiums . This is dependent on individual circumstances and one of the first things you need to identify when looking for individual life insurance . In figuring out your life insurance needs , you should determine how much life insurance death benefit your beneficiaries will require . Then shop and compare quotes to get an idea of how much that amount life insurance coverage will be . Budgeting and planning for how much you want to allocate toward life insurance is important . To manage your life insurance policies efficiently reassess your need for life insurance every two to three years .
That 's an interesting question - do you mean how much coverage do you need to purchase to ensure the value of your belongings are covered adequately , or how much should the policy have paid out to you after your claim was processed ? In the case of coverage , you would need to have an idea of how much value there is to be insured . For example , do you have a lot of electronics , or jewelry ? If so , you would need more coverage than someone who has very few of those things . If you meant how much should you have received , that depends on a lot of things specific to your policy and claim . If you would like more information , I 'd be happy to help , just contact me . Thanks for asking !
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
The answer to this is very subjective depending upon your situation , but I 'll try to make it a little more simple . The idea has always been that , when you retire , your need for life insurance decreases . Today , that 's not always the case . It 's much more complicated now , but there are some universal ideas : What is your need for pure death benefit ? How much debt do you have and how long will you have it ? How is your pension , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , etc. set up ? Will the income from this be set up in a way that can provide both you and a spouse with adequate income should either of you die ? If not , how much income do you need to provide in the event of your death ? What will your death cost in terms of funeral expenses , taxes , and estate settlement ? Do you want to have that provided for ? Do you have people or institutions that you want to leave money for ? Will one or both of you need special care ? When you answer these questions and have an amount in mind , it 's time to explore how best to go about setting it up the right way . I 'm not going to go into the type of insurance or any income you may need to offset a shortfall in your retirement . That 's a much larger discussion that I 'll leave for you and an agent you can trust . He/She will be able to talk with you and come up with the program that fits your need and your budget .
To figure out how much life insurance you need with kids , you can make a little worksheet . Put down how much your family spends on average each year , and subtract your spouse 's salary from that . The difference is what you need to cover . Multiple it by how many years until your children are adults . Throw in extra for college . That is how much life insurance you may want to purchase .
It depends on individual or family circumstance . A better question is how much life insurance is enough ? Remember one reason for Life Insurance is income replacement . Having enough life insurance to ensure a family is protected is usually the best place to start . A term life insurance contract typically provides a large death benefit with a low premium payment . Provide peace of mind knowing your family will be protected then decide if and how much Whole Life Insurance is enough . The term Whole Life means you will be paying premiums your entire , or `` Whole '' life . Having too much Whole Life Insurance might be an issue if the primary breadwinner loses his or her job and can no longer afford making premium payments . This is where Whole Life can be costly . When considering the purchase of Whole Life Insurance it is a long term , risk adverse strategy . Make sure you are able to make premium payments for at least 10 to 12 years regardless of job loss , increase in expenses , etc. . All the risk is transferred to the insurance carrier and the interest crediting provides a guarantee . Plus there is usually a ` dividend ' or return or premium . The only thing the insured needs to do is make sure they make the premium payments . There is no flexibility with these premiums , like Universal Life Insurance . It generally takes a long time to build cash value . For standard products and level premium schedules the break even point for premiums paid equaling cash value accumulation is generally 10-12 years . Always ask your agent questions if you are unsure of how life insurance products work .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Does Contingent Mean On Life Insurance ?
If you are referring to a `` contingent '' beneficiary , it is simply the `` second '' beneficiary named , so that if something quite unfortunate occurred to the primary beneficiary , the contingent would be the recipient of the proceeds . Initially , when you apply for a life insurance policy -LRB- or other contracts -RRB- , these would be named .
Contingent policy beneficiaries or owner can be the second option for the proceeds of the policy if the primary beneficiaries are no longer alive or at the death of the policy owner -LRB- not also as the insured -RRB- . Think of contingents as a backup option or people in reserve that would have an insurable interest in the demise of the policy insured .
The definition of contingent is `` dependent for existence on something not yet certain '' . In life insurance terms , it means that the contingent beneficiary exists just in case the primary beneficiary -LRB- or all the primary beneficiaries , if there are more than one -RRB- are not alive when the insured person dies . If the owner is someone different than the insured , one could set a contingent owner of the policy , as well . Life insurance is to protect survivors from the `` what if 's '' in life , and thus it is a good idea to name a contingent beneficiary for the same reason .
Life insurance policies can have a contingent beneficiary or contingent owner . This simply means that if something happens that the primary beneficiary or owner predeceases the insured then the policy proceeds or ownership transfers to the contingent -LRB- or secondary -RRB- owner or beneficiary . If both predecease the insured then any funds from the policy would go into the estate .
The definition of contingent is `` dependent for existence on something not yet certain '' . In life insurance terms , it means that the contingent beneficiary exists just in case the primary beneficiary -LRB- or all the primary beneficiaries , if there are more than one -RRB- are not alive when the insured person dies . If the owner is someone different than the insured , one could set a contingent owner of the policy , as well . Life insurance is to protect survivors from the `` what if 's '' in life , and thus it is a good idea to name a contingent beneficiary for the same reason .
Contingent means conditional . In life insurance , you can choose a contingent beneficiary or owner for your policy on the condition that the primary beneficiary or owner dies . If no contingent beneficiary is named and the primary beneficiary or beneficiaries die , the insured 's estate usually becomes the policy 's automatic contingent beneficiary .
Life insurance policies can have a contingent beneficiary or contingent owner . This simply means that if something happens that the primary beneficiary or owner predeceases the insured then the policy proceeds or ownership transfers to the contingent -LRB- or secondary -RRB- owner or beneficiary . If both predecease the insured then any funds from the policy would go into the estate .
This is a very interesting question because life insurance carriers allow for a lot of flexibility in beneficiary designations . For example , you have the primary beneficiary . This person -LRB- or entity , such as a corporation or trust -RRB- will get the money when the insured dies . What if I unfortunately the primary beneficiary is not alive -LRB- or in business -RRB- when the insured dies ? That is why you can designate a contingent beneficiary . This beneficiary will get the money in those exact circumstances - when the primary beneficiary is not available . What if you wanted to name multiple primary or contingent beneficiaries ? That can be done . Do they have to get equal shares ? No . As a matter of fact , especially when the contingent beneficiary is children , parents often do not apportion the benefit equally . What if you want to set up successor beneficiaries along bloodlines ? Such as your child , but if your child is not available , then your childs child ? This can also be done . Make sure you discuss this with your estate planning attorney . What if you want to make the beneficiaries minors ? Not a good idea . An insurance company will not release money to a minor . You will need to do some estate planning to secure that money .
Of course ! You have the option to put on primary beneficiaries , contingent beneficiaries -LRB- in case the primary predeceases the insured -RRB- , and even tertiary beneficiaries if you 'd like -LRB- in case the primary and contingent beneficiaries predecease the insured -RRB- . Each level -LRB- primary , contingent , and tertiary -RRB- can have more than one beneficiary . You also want to make sure to designate what happens to a beneficiary 's share if he/she predeceases the insured -LRB- especially if there is more than 1 beneficiary - e.g. does it go to the other beneficiary ? to the estate ? to someone else ? etc. -RRB- The other thing you want to make sure of is that the policy structure does not violate the `` Goodman Triangle '' -LRB- named after a court case -RRB- . The Goodman Triangle , in short , states that 2 of the 3 parties of a life insurance contract must be the same to avoid certain tax consequences -LRB- same owner and beneficiary with a different insured or same owner and insured with a different beneficiary -RRB- . If you want to place more than one beneficiary on the policy , the owner and insured would have to be the same person to not violate the Goodman Triangle . When the Goodman Triangle is violated , the situation can result in the monies being subject to estate taxes or gift tax consequences . If a policy is owned by a trust such as an Irrevocable Life Insurance Trust -LRB- ILIT -RRB- , the insured and beneficiary will be the trust and the insured will be the person who 's life the trust was created for . The trust would illustrate all of the payout structure scenarios when the insured dies and a claim is made on the policy . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
If the policyowner dies before the insured , the ownership would go to the contingent owner -LRB- if one was desginated -RRB- . If no contingent owner was designated , the policy ownership would then go into the estate and become an asset to the estate - from there it will have to go through the probate process . The Will -LRB- if one was left -RRB- would then designate who gets the asset . If the policyowner dies intestate -LRB- meaning they did not have a will -RRB- , a judge would have to sign off on who gets the asset -LRB- the insurance policy in this case -RRB- . Once new ownership has been established , the owner would then have the option to keep the policy going or cash it out -LRB- if applicable - term insurance does not build cash value , permanent insurance policies do -RRB- . If cashed out , the amount received would be the cash value less any applicable surrender charges , outstanding loan balances , or interest on the loans . The insured does not have the ability to cash out the policy unless they were the policyowner .
What is a contingent for life insurance ? Contingent is a term applied to the seconary beneficiary . The contingent beneficiary comes into play on a life policy when the primary beneficiary has also passed prior to the death of the insured or decides to turn down the benefit offered to them .
If the owner and insured are two different people and the owner predeceases the insured , the ownership of the life insurance policy would be given to the contingent policyowner , if one was named . If a contingent policyowner is not cited in the policy , then the policy would transfer to his/her 's estate and go through the probate process . So , in short , ownership would be determined by a judge . When you set up a policy with the owner and beneficiary as the same person , many people will cite the contingent beneficiary as the contingent owner in case they want to carry the policy forward . Keep in mind , if the policy goes through the probate process to determine ownership , someone must still continue to pay the premiums . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
The beneficiaries of a life insurance policy pay in a certain order . First is the primary beneficiary which can be a person , a few people paid by percentage , or an institution , such as to repay a loan . Second is the contingent beneficiary . The contingent beneficiary is paid if the primary benefit dies before or with the insured . Third is the tertiary beneficiary . This beneficiary receives life insurance proceeds if all of the primary and contingent beneficiaries die before or with the insured . If the later beneficiaries are not named on the policy , then life insurance proceeds roll into the estate and will be subject to probate and estate taxes . This is always as shame as life insurance proceeds are usually not taxed if there is a named beneficiary . Be sure and work with a knowledgeable agent or advisor to be sure your life insurance policy is set up correctly .
In Canada , if the owner of the policy dies . what happens to the ownership of the policy depends on what the owner had put in place prior to his/her death . If the owner has named a contingent owner the the policy would transfer that way . If their was no contingent owner the the ownership would form part of the estate and be probated . Depending on who the policy ownership was transferred to there could be tax consequences . The cash value is what could be surrendered , the death benefit is not paid until the life insured 's death . NOTE , once the policy has been issued the life insured has no claim on the policy or its cash value , unless the owner gave them the access . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
What happens when both parents die ? Well it 's going to depend on how much time they spent in planning for such an occurrance . If they planned well , everything will go exactly has they have laid out in their insurance policies and will . If they did nothing and did n't name contingent beneficiaires then those funds go into the estate and are subject to probate . In the simplest ways , naming contingent beneficiaires allows for the funds to escape probate and go directly to the named individuals or entities . If the contingents were still minors the polcies might reference a will where the establishment of a trust happens and the funds go there to be distributed over time .
Who owns the life insurance policy when the owner dies ? That depends if there is a contingent owner named in the policy . It does not automatically transfer to the life insured . if there is no contingent owner named in the policy , the the ownership would transfer to the owner 's estate and will be dealt with there . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community . .
Contingent deferred annuities are annuities with contingent deferred sales charges . This sales charge is a surrender charge that represents the costs incurred by the insurer to issue the annuity and is amortized -LRB- or spread out -RRB- over the course of several years -- generally between 5 and 15 years . Deferred can also refer to the fact that annuity is not an immediate annuity , meaning it will not pay an immediate income stream , but rather can be left to accumulate interest to increase the value of the annuity .
A contingent owner on a life insurance policy is the person who would own the policy if the primary owner died . Contingent owners are only used when the primary owner is not also the insured person . The owner is the one who stipulate the beneficiary , method of payment , and all decisions regarding the policy . So if the primary owner would pass away , the contingent owner would make those decisions .
If there is a contingent owner named on the policy , the life insurance policy ownership would pass to the contingent owner . If there is not a contingent owner , the policy would pass through the estate of the person who owned the policy . If the estate was already closed by the time the family found the policy , they can contact the insurer for advice on how to proceed .
If there is a contingent owner named , the owner of the policy will become the contingent owner i -LRB- f the original owner of the policy dies -RRB- . If the insured person and policy owner are two different people , it is important to name a contingent owner so that the wishes of the policy owner are followed .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Are The Top Rated Term Life Insurance Companies ?
There 's hundreds and hundred 's of life insurance companies in the marketplace and there are many carriers that have a superior financial rating -LRB- `` A '' , `` A + '' , or `` A + + '' rating -RRB- . Some of the big name companies with superior ratings that feature competitive rates in the term life insurance marketplace are Banner Life , MetLife , American General , Lincoln National , Genworth , Ohio National , Principal National , just to name a few . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are a number of ways to review the ratings of life insurance companies . One is through rating agencies . The most popular rating agencies are AM Best , Standard 's and Poore 's -LRB- S&P -RRB- , Fitch 's , and Weiss . They each have a different set of letters and numbers . You can find the rating of Term Life Insurance companies by going to their website and the `` About Us '' or `` Financial Information '' tabs . Some companies are rated highest in one category but not another , so you can look at all four for a total picture of the company you are investigating . Another way to judge life insurance companies is by their customer satisfaction or complaints . You can also look at financial information . The ratings of the company , along with customer reviews and company financial 's , can help you determine the strength of any company you are looking at . Keep in mind that the rating of companies can fluctuate . Some that were rated poorly in the past have made adjustments to bring their ratings up . Also , it does not take the top rating to be a secure company .
There is no one top rated life insurance company , but every life insurance company has the chance to earn the top ratings from several different rating companies . That being said , only a small % of companies get the top rating . To find a company 's rating , you can go to their website and hit the `` About Us '' tab . The main rating companies are AM Best -LRB- for which A + + is their top rating -RRB- , S&P -LRB- for which AAA is highest -RRB- , Fitch -LRB- also uses AAA for best rating -RRB- and Moody 's -LRB- Aaa is their top rating -RRB- .
The term life insurance market is huge . Most term life companies that are committed to compete in this space have several policy provisions or riders to entice the consumer to purchase their proprietary term product . One of those provisions is convertibility to permanent life insurance . This may be a tipping point issue in the end if the premium is relatively the same between the top term life companies . Not every term life company has competitive permanent product line , so shopping with this in mind is a great starting point in reviewing whats best for you . We can help with that . Other area in term life insurance that must be considered is the health of the proposed insured . First among the critical considerations is smoking . There are term life insurance companies that are very benevolent to smokers and smoking secession . There are also companies that are benevolent based on their underwriting protocols by disease . There are a unique collection of companies that fit the impaired risk profile and preferred health categories . We can help with that . By gathering your financial goals and medical profile , a recommendation of the top three term life insurance companies can be made . We can help with that .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Since I have no personal connection or experience with Colonial Penn Life Insurance Company my first `` go to '' for information about any insurance company is to check the independent ratings . You can check them for yourself by searching the internet for `` comdex rating for ___ '' whatever company you want to search for . What I found for Colonial Penn was that they do not rank among the top 250 life insurance companies in America as of December 2013 . Top Life INsurance Reviews.com posted the comdex along with the AM Best , Standard & Poor , Moody 's , and Fitch rankings for each of the top 250 and Colonial Penn was not listed .
Getting life insurance online in Ohio can save you time , money and frustration . Purchasing a policy through an Ohio broker and their website will allow you to shop and compare the top-rated companies and their policies . As an Ohio broker for more than 32 years , we 're aware of which carrier offer the best rates and what types of plans are the most appropriate for your situation . We 're `` in your community '' and share the same goals and dreams you do . The combination of a top-rated website and three decades of local experience is tough to beat ! Term and permanent coverage is available that is suitable for the vast majority of people that apply . For persons with serious medical conditions , there are companies that specialize in non-standard risks and often the prices are extremely affordable . `` No physical '' policies are also available from many of the top carriers .
There are a number of ways to review the ratings of life insurance companies . One is through rating agencies . The most popular rating agencies are AM Best , Standard 's and Poore 's -LRB- S&P -RRB- , Fitch 's , and Weiss . They each have a different set of letters and numbers . You can find the rating of Term Life Insurance companies by going to their website and the `` About Us '' or `` Financial Information '' tabs . Some companies are rated highest in one category but not another , so you can look at all four for a total picture of the company you are investigating . Another way to judge life insurance companies is by their customer satisfaction or complaints . You can also look at financial information . The ratings of the company , along with customer reviews and company financial 's , can help you determine the strength of any company you are looking at . Keep in mind that the rating of companies can fluctuate . Some that were rated poorly in the past have made adjustments to bring their ratings up . Also , it does not take the top rating to be a secure company .
Term life insurance rates are so variable that there is really no way to state an average Term life insurance rate . They depend on the length of the term -LRB- the shorter the term , the lower the rates usually are -RRB- , the health risk of the Insured person , whether tobacco is used , and the face amount of the policy . To compare Term life insurance rates , visit the quoters on websites such as ours , that will allow you to put in different ages , health conditions , term lengths and face amounts . By seeing what the best rates are for the top 5 or ten carriers , you will not necessarily be seeing the average rates but you will see the lowest rates available for you .
The where/who question is a great one !! Our belief at ' I Hate Buying Insurance ' is the UNDERWRITING is the tail that wags the dog -LRB- one of my fav southern sayings -RRB- . There are hundreds of options across the country for Term Life . Each carrier has a different underwriting appetite . Do you have 5 - 10 extra pounds to shed ? That will be a factor between when determining what health tier you qualify for . Most carrier have 4 tiers & are commonly called Standard , Standard Plus , Preferred , and Preferred Plus . Most life insurance shoppers understand that health plays a huge role in determining the `` rate '' you qualify for . Yet lifestyle , occupation , hobbies , family health history , & more play into the rate you qualify for . A top agency will work with dozens of carriers . What name , mascot , or even financial rating -LRB- do n't sweat A - vs. A + + -RRB- are all secondary to getting the best underwriting for your specific needs . One carrier may offer you Standard while a Preferred is available at a second . Another thing to consider as of this writing is a new generation of Term Life called `` Living Benefits Life '' -LRB- LBL -RRB- You DO N'T have to die to use you `` life '' insurance anymore . Several carriers offer the ability to accelerate when diagnosed with a range of Critical or Chronic Illnesses . Just think of it as accessing the bank vault early . If you were diagnosed with invasive cancer , would n't it be to get a large sum of cash to help pay for deductibles , time away from work , home health care , & travel to the hospital you need that is in a different state ? LBL life might just do all that for you My suggestion for shopping Term Life plans : 1 . If the agent or dot.com you call doesnt ask A LOT of questions about health , history , & lifestyle , RUN . All theyre doing is guessing . Accurate rates do NOT come from age , height/weight , & current tobacco use . The agent needs to interview you so youre matched with the right carrier . 2 . Dont be afraid to ask the agent , What underwriting factors lead you to this option vs. any other carrier ? 3 . See if the agent offers you a LBL option . IF NOT , it is my strong opinion that her/she is NOT on top of current trends . If an agent or dot.com is doing what is best for you , several ideas/options should be explored . If you have any questions or comments , reach out to us !
Unfortunately , there is n't one company that is best in the immediate annuity marketplace . Different companies are more and/or less competitive depending on demographics . A company might have better rates for women than men or for someone in their 60s versus someone in their 80s . Some companies also offer inflation adjustments while some do n't . Some companies even allow some access to monies already annuitized . It really depends on the person and their situation . It is best to work with an independent broker that can show you some of the top companies with the top rates so that you can pick what is best for your situation .
A top-heavy plan is one that benefits company officers , owners , employee shareholders , etc. and/or key employees . If a qualified plan becomes top-heavy , there are top heavy tests that ensure the other employees receive fair to equal treatment with similar benefits under the plan . In general , the basic definition of a top heavy defined contribution plan is when total account balances of key employees exceed 60 % of the total retirement accounts .
A lot of it depends on personal preference and what your concerns are . If you want to make sure it 's with a top-rated company who is financially strong and stable , you want to look at what their rating is -LRB- e.g. A.M. Best ratings : A , A + , and A + + indicate superior financial ratings -RRB- . If you 're looking at permanent , long-term coverage , you may want to look at the most stable companies because you want them to be there for the next 50 , 60 , 70 , years . If you 're only looking for a 10-year term insurance policy , you may be willing to look at a company with less favorable numbers because their rates are cheaper . It can also be helpful to look into reviews that people say about the company - positive aspects , any major continuous issues with claims , etc. ? The other major thing that everyone looks at is pricing - your premiums that you pay . There 's no one company that offers the `` best '' life insurance policy . The carrier that 's going to offer the best rates for you may not be the carrier the offers the best rates for someone else . This is because people may qualify for different risk classes -LRB- one of the single-most critical things to think about with coverage -RRB- , they may be looking to secure a different amount of coverage , keep the coverage for a different length of time , or may live in a different state -LRB- not every product from every carrier is available in every state -RRB- . All of these factors go into the calculation of rates . You 'll want to consult with an independent life insurance agent/broker who can compare multiple companies and make sure that the policy you apply for is best serving the desired needs that you want to have the coverage in place to protect .
When this question is asked I am not sure if you mean the best insurance company with coverage 's and claims or the who has the best rates . Let 's address rates first : There is no company who has the best rates as there are many varying factors that can make one insurance company rise to the top over another as it pertains to premium . In other words who has the best rate for me may not be the best for you , and we could live right next door to each other . Now lets move on to the more important issue and that is coverage 's : What you have to understand is most insurance companies have varying options/packages of coverage 's available to purchase . In most cases agents tend to offer the cheapest package which does not maximize coverage 's that are potentially available to the client . I suggest when shopping for insurance that you truly consult with your agent about the different options available by an insurance company so you can make an educated decision on the coverage you wish to purchase and how much of the risk you yourself wish to assume . As an independent agent I am able to offer quotes and coverage 's from multiple companies to help my clients make the most informed decision about their most important asset , and that is their home . Now the next subject would be claims : Which insurance company continues to rise to the top in claims handling . There are many independent websites which you do a quick search on and find ratings on how well claims are handled and their overall customer satisfaction and loyalty . There are many companies that are great in the claims area that I bet you have never even heard of . You will also find negatives on every insurance company out there without exception . Most of the negatives are due to coverage 's not being in place that the client thought they had . Or in other words . A lack of understanding their policy . This goes back to my suggestion on being educated on the coverage 's available to you . There are many independent online reviews available to you -LRB- some good , some not so good -RRB- that will give you ratings on how well the claims experience is for clients and how insurance companies rank in the claims department . But there is one thing that I believe is very critical to the claims process and that is your agent . An absentee agent can make the process very frustrating if you are having some communication difficulty with the insurance company . An agent that is actually working for you can help make any unfortunate claims experience must less painful then it needs to be . So never take the agent out of the equation when shopping for homeowners insurance . So with all that being said , my parting advice is do your research , consult and ask lots of questions from your agent . Do n't be shy are think it 's a dumb question because it 's not . After all , were talking about your home .
You can look at ratings done by agencies such as S&P , AM Best , Moody 's , and Fitch 's to see which companies have the highest ratings . There are several that rank at the top in all categories . However , insurance companies are strictly regulated , and you can feel safe buying a policy with any company that ranks in the top several categories of ratings .
Life insurance for a smoker costs less than you may realize . Rates for nicotine users have reduced in recent years and many affordable smoking policies are offered by the top-rated companies . The best prices are typically found by experienced brokers and our top-ranked websites that can accomplish hours of research almost instantaneously . And best of all , the quotes are always free and applying for coverage is simple . That 's our specialty . Here are some sample monthly rates -LRB- below -RRB- . Prices are based on a healthy smoking 35 year-old male : $ 79.31 - $ 500,000 20-year guarantee $ 45.41 - $ 250,000 20-year guarantee $ 30.06 - $ 250,000 10-year guarantee $ 39.83 - $ 350,000 10-year guarantee Rates are based on the most competitive offers at the time of the quote request . Only `` A '' rated companies were considered . Of course , all policies are subject to underwriting guidelines .
Life insurance rates for smokers may be less expensive than you realize ! Of course , as experienced brokers , our job is to shop , compare and find the lowest prices with the help of our top-rated websites and modern software . Nicotine use is one of the underwriting factors considered when determining rates . However , other factors , such as use of medications , existing conditions and height/weight will also factor in the determination of prices . A few general estimates from top-rated companies : -LRB- Rates are monthly for a healthy smoker...10-year guarantee -RRB- : $ 39 - $ 250,000 40 year old male $ 19 - $ 100,000 40 year old male $ 33 - $ 250,000 40 year old female $ 60 - $ 500,000 40 year old female $ 29 - $ 250,000 30 year old male ALSO ... $ 109.86 - $ 500,000 40 year old male 20-year guarantee
The best health insurance rates can easily be found online . Whether you have pre-existing medical conditions , or are simply shopping for a catastrophic medical plan , an experienced broker and their website will save you money , time and frustration . Individual , family and small-business coverage is available . That 's our job and perhaps the main reason consumers realize that obtaining affordable coverage from reputable companies is easiest when letting the experts find the best offers . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris , premier health insurance broker for 34 years , and owner of several top-rated consumer websites that offer the lowest available health insurance prices from the top-rated companies .
Buying Medigap Insurance can be a lot easier than it looks . You can get immediate information and quotes by going to a website like ours . You type in basic information and can be reviewing quotes from the top rated carriers in about one minute . You can follow up with one of our licensed staff to get all of your questions answered . I would suggest the following to make things easier on you : Contact an independent agent that specializes in Medigap Insurance -LRB- Medicare Supplement Insurance -RRB- . Look at what plans are available . Learn what each of those plans will cover and not cover . Have that agent help you pick the the Medigap plan that best fits your needs and budget . Have the agent sign you up with the plan and the top `` A '' rated carrier that fits best for you . Good luck !
The best life insurance in Ohio depends on what you are looking for . If you are looking for the rating of the company , then New York Life , Northwestern Mutual , and TIAA-CREF had top ratings from all the main rating agencies in 2012 . However , there are many companies that are just a rating or two off from those and still are outstanding companies . If you are looking for the best features , there are many companies that have guaranteed death benefit at a guaranteed price , conversion options , and a variety of riders from which to choose . If you are looking for the best price , that depends on your age , sex , tobacco status , health , face amount , type of policy , and other risk factors . Contact a website or agency that sells life insurance in Ohio to get your best life insurance rate .
end question
start question
home-insurance
How Much Is The Average Cost Of Home Insurance ?
Average is relative to the person using the term . That being said I would say the average homeowners policy in my area is about $ 1000/yr . I have seen policies as low as about $ 400/yr . Contact your local agent and they can advise you of the coverages available within your area and the costs associated with them .
-- > Normal 0 How much will it cost to rebuild your home should it be damaged or destroyed ? I doubt anyone can give you the correct answer because the cost to rebuild your home will vary considerably depending on how it is damaged . If your home is the only one damaged in your area , for instance a fire in the home , the cost to rebuild will be one number . And if a number of homes in your area are damaged or destroyed , for instance a storm or wild fire , the cost to rebuild could be significantly more as materials , labor and contractors may be in short supply and cost much more . So how does one address that possibility ? Some , not all , insurance companies offer a Guaranteed Dwelling Replacement Cost feature that can be added to your policy . Under this feature , you are required to purchase an amount of insurance consistent with the current cost to rebuild your home at normal prices . If your home needs to be rebuilt following a loss , the amount of insurance will automatically increase to whatever you need to rebuild the same home you had before the loss . That is the only way I know of to always buy the right amount of insurance , get one that adjusts to changing loss conditions . Otherwise , its just a guessing game and if you are wrong , you lose , not the insurance company .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much a specific individual should be paying for health insurance is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost per person in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the new Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . You may also have options for group coverage through your employer . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
An Average person driving an average car living in an average neighborhood with an average driving record who wants average coverage 's and drives an average amount of miles and holds an average job with an average wife and average kids and an average income would surely pay an average price . However as an agent to be a little more specific I would need the answers to what is average .
The average rating people get for life insurance is Standard . From that , you can determine the average cost for persons of different ages . Keep in mind that the average cost for an 80 year old is going to be much different than the average cost for a 20 year old . As will the average cost for someone with diabetes as compared with someone with perfect health . The length of the term , or whether the policy is a permanent policy , have a great effect on the premium , as well . It is a good idea to go into a life insurance sale with your top dollar that you can spend , in mind . Then see if you can get a policy that suits your needs for a premium a little lower than that . Something is better than nothing , and by consulting with an honest and knowledgeable agent , most people can find coverage at a price they can afford .
The cost of life insurance increases with age . Obviously , the older we get the more likely we are to die , resulting in the life insurance company paying out a claim . In the words of George Lopez , `` Each Birthday is just another year closer to death '' or `` Studies have shown that the more birthdays you have the longer you live '' . The life insurance industry has amassed a large amount of data at what age people die and the cause of death . With a large enough population , they can predict accurately the average age of a man & woman at death , which helps them derive the cost of insurance based on the age of the insured . For example , in a 20-yr level term , they simply average out the cost of insurance for that 20 year span . For a permanent policy , they simply average the cost until the average age of death . So , all life insurance costs increase as we grow older . That is the reason why the premiums for insurance are much cheaper when we are younger . One last consideration ... because the cost of insurance increases , if you purchased a permanent -LRB- eg universal life , variable universal , etc -RRB- and paid only minimum premiums to keep the policy going , you may receive notification that you need to pay a large sum in premium to keep the insurance in force . This occurs when a policy is underfunded or in other words , the policy owner did not pay enough premiums in to the policy over time and it can not sustain the cost to pay out the death benefit .
On average $ 10-15 per month , however , that doesnt even indicate how much it might cost you . Your location , loss experience and policy limits could vary a great deal from average . The better question is , How much can you pay in damages if someone is hurt in your unit , or if everything goes up in smoke , how will you get the money to start over ?
The average cost of auto insurance per year is going to vary from state to state and more specifically , person to person . Almost all -LRB- if not all -RRB- insurance companies look at an individuals credit score , among other factors , to determine their ` insurance score ' . If you have a lower insurance score , your premium will be lower and visa versa . It 's very difficult to determine the average without factoring in credit , state , year-make-model of car , how much you drive , and your experience level among a host of other attributes . The state of Oklahoma for example is on average , much higher than the state of Missouri . One of the biggest reasons is due to natural risk , or geographic risk . IE ... more storms in Oklahoma Vs. Missouri . I 'm sure a simple google search would provide an average vs all states and credit scores . Although I would be skeptical of that number generated due to all the variances that determine the price .
The average cost of life insurance varies so much that it is impossible to state a meaningful figure . What is average for a 20 year old male is a far cry of what is average for an 80 year old male . Those two persons generally do n't even need the same face amounts or purchase the same type of policies . To find the average cost of Term Life Insurance for a relatively healthy person , you can use quote engines on websites that will show that . Better yet is to call the website or a local agency , and discuss your health and the type of policy you want . If they have several companies that will cover you with the same type of policy , that is a good way to see an average price of what life insurance would cost for you .
Consumers should become as knowledgeable as the can be about the risk of taking too long to die . For starters , find out what the costs for care are in the area in which you intend to retire and/or spend the latter part of your life . Call local care facilities and home care services and request a listing of costs for each facility and level of care . You can also get an idea of not only today 's estimated costs but what those costs might be in the future by going to this website : WEBSITELINK . Click on the state you want , then use the down arrow on the left side of the page to find the locale within that state that corresponds to your latter-years living area . Then , click on `` Future Costs '' to see how much the same care might cost when you need it , years from now . Understand that no long-term care insurance policy can possibly guarantee that it will pay all of your health care costs after the point that you ca n't take care of yourself any longer regardless of how high a premium you pay . Consult with an experienced insurance agent that specializes in long-term care . It is a specialty . Most agents that are licensed to sell it do n't know very much at all about it . If it happens to you , statistics are useless . But , here are a few that you should know when assessing if you want to buy insurance and how much of it would be worth the outlay in premium : - The average claim lasts about 24-26 months -LRB- i.e. the insured dies -RRB- - Of those that go beyond that period of time , over 90 % of claims are settled within five years . - To date , I believe that the record for a single claim is just over $ 1.4 MM . - Take projections of future cost with a grain of salt because it is not known what new medical technologies will come along , nor is it known what new care strategies might be available 20-40 years out . If you can afford the premiums on a $ 300/day , 2-year pool of money -LRB- it could last longer than that -RRB- with no inflation rider on the policy today , you can probably afford some type of long-term care policy . If not , it is a waste of money to buy any insurance policy that you ca n't afford now and know you wo n't be able to afford it in the future .
The most recent figures for late March , 2014 indicate that the average cost of an individual major medical health insurance policy in the United States is $ 328 per month . That said , your results can and almost certainly will vary . A national average figure is not likely to be reflective of what the cost would be for you in the specific area of the state that you are a resident in . Also , this average figure does not take into account any possible advanced premium tax subsidy a person might qualify for , which would reduce that person 's net cost of insurance . Individual health insurance rates can vary wildly from one state to another and can vary significantly within the various regions that each state is subdivided into under the structure imposed by the Affordable Care Act . And the reported national average price becomes an even more unreliable yardstick because it also averages in a wide range of levels of insurance coverage . As an analogy , you can get an average cost for a new car purchase in the U.S. but that may bear little resemblance to the price of the specific car you want to buy .
Without having a crystal ball , it 's impossible to know how much of any type of insurance you should have.Obviously , the more , the better . With Long Term Care , you buy a total pool of money and you pick the maximum amount PER DAY that will be paid from the pool of money . So again , the larger that pool is , the better . There are lots of statistics out there , but the main thing is that it must be affordable so you keep it over the long haul . A good average figure might be in the $ 200,000 range -LRB- pool of money -RRB- and $ 200/day . That amount would cover many situations including an average nursing home . However , most claims occur in YOUR home since most people want to stay in their home . So if the above is unaffordable , buy as much as you can . You may only need $ 80 for home health care . Something is always better than nothing - and this is especially true with Long Term Care .
We 've entered into a new phase of the development for covering the risk of having to pay for long-term care costs and therefore , a new phase of designing coverage . The consumer does n't have to pay a fortune for at least some coverage , but expectations over how much risk one can afford to transfer to an insurance company may require some reality therapy.A base plan for a couple can cost around $ 3,000 - $ 5,000 per year depending on age . The design is simple : a fixed pool of money with as much access to it -LRB- maximum daily or monthly benefit -RRB- that one can afford . There is no accommodation for inflation and no riders , except perhaps the `` monthly home care '' rider which if not part of the contract should be added . It does n't cost much as a rider . The pool should be around $ 300,000 , if possible.A value plan for a couple can cost between $ 5,000 and $ 7,000 per year . The design includes the lowest cost inflation rider , monthly home care rider -LRB- if not included in the base plan -RRB- and maybe survivor waiver of premium . The pool of money to pay care costs and daily/monthly access to it should be as much as can reasonably afforded.A premium plan -LRB- which we used to illustrate routinely five years ago -RRB- for a couple can run from $ 9,000 - $ 14,000 / yr . depending on which combination of bells and whistles you want and can afford . This design would include one of the automatic annual 5 % compounded or simple benefit increase riders . Available riders could include shared-care , spousal waiver of premium , 0-day elimination for home care , non-forfeiture rider , and/or return of premium . Other riders , depending on the carrier , may be available . NOTE : This design is most likely to experience in force premium increases over time due to the uncapped benefit increase rider.For a single person , drop the above range of numbers down $ 1,000 for the base plan , $ 2,000 for the value plan , and $ 3,000 - $ 4,000 for the premium plan.These are all VERY ROUND numbers . The point is that columns and articles in the press recently have only looked at the old way of thinking about long-term care . It 's pointless to dredge up old statements by insurance companies which at the time reflected their ignorance of a -RRB- how many people would actually use their policies , b -RRB- how many would keep them in force if premiums rose - the lapse ratio is 1-2 % , about the lowest in the insurance industry - adjusting their benefits to stay in the game , and c -RRB- how few people would buy long-term care insurance - the percentage of Americans owning their own coverage is about 7-8 % and holding.The probability of needing to pay for some or all of the costs of extended professional care at home or in a facility is still relatively high as we live longer , but not necessarily better . No LTC insurance policy can promise to pay all care costs , but is anyone going to be turn away a payment from an insurance company that covers half of those costs?Some coverage is better than none .
Nursing home care is typically covered by a Long-Term Care insurance policy . Medicare can cover some nursing home expenses , but only under specific conditions . The facility providing the nursing home care to Medicare beneficiaries must be a Medicare certified skilled nursing home and you must have a qualifying hospital stay -LRB- at least a 3-day hospital stay -RRB- before going into the nursing care facility . Medigap plans can provide some coverage too if Medicare approves the claim for nursing home care -LRB- Medigap plans only provide benefits if Medicare does too -RRB- . You can also refer to Medicare.gov to see specifically what nursing home care expenses are covered . A Long-Term Care insurance policy is recommended because it can protect you from draining all your savings to pay for the expensive costs of nursing home care . According to longtermcare.gov , the average cost of care in a nursing home facility is approximately $ 6,235 per month in a semi-private room -LRB- that 's $ 74,820 per year -RRB- , $ 6,965 per month for a private room -LRB- that 's $ 83,580 per year -RRB- , and $ 3,293 per month for care in an assisted living facility -LRB- that 's $ 39,516 -RRB- . In short , the cost of care is more than what most people make in a year and they would drain their assets paying for the care . How many people could afford to write that size check ? So why take on the risk yourself when you can shift the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- and let them take care of the expenses . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Because it 's not going to happen to them and it 's expensive . But the truth is the cost of the coverage is not nearly as expensive as the average cost of care and there is a pretty darned good chance they WILL need care . Roughly 70 % of people over 65 will need long term care services in their lifetime , 40 % of people currently receiving long term care services are aged 10-64 ! Average home health care expenses in Illinois average over $ 45,000 while a semi-private room averages around $ 70,000 , FAR more than the cost of the coverage to pay for it .
To figure out how much life insurance you need with kids , you can make a little worksheet . Put down how much your family spends on average each year , and subtract your spouse 's salary from that . The difference is what you need to cover . Multiple it by how many years until your children are adults . Throw in extra for college . That is how much life insurance you may want to purchase .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Can Disability Insurance Be Garnished ?
While Disability Insurance may be exempt from garnishment in your state , if your funds are comingled with your other funds in your bank account , it is possible for your bank account to be garnished . So it is a good idea to set up a separate bank account for your Disability benefits . If you are ordered by the court to pay child support , or have unpaid bills , then your Disability Insurance proceeds may be subject to garnishment .
As with so many things in life , the answer is `` it depends '' . If you are talking about Social Security disability benefits it will depend upon the type of disability benefit you are receiving . Supplemental Security Income -LRB- SSI -RRB- disability benefits , which are for certain low income individuals e.g. - blind , aged , disabled and below certain income thresholds -RRB- who do not qualify for regular Social Security Disability can not have their SSI payments garnished for child support . On the other hand , standard Social Security Disability payments can be garnished to meet child support obligations . While it is much more complicated , it is also possible that a portion of VA disability benefits can be garnished for child support . Finally , if you are receiving disability payments through an individual or group disability insurance policy those payments can be garnished for child support purposes though the specifics vary from state to state .
Whether private disability insurance can be garnished depends on the state in which you live . However , if you put your disability insurance payments in a bank account with other funds , the bank account can be garnished . So it is a good idea to keep those funds separate . Also , if you owe child support or back payments on a bill , even disability insurance payments can usually be garnished .
While Disability Insurance may be exempt from garnishment in your state , if your funds are comingled with your other funds in your bank account , it is possible for your bank account to be garnished . So it is a good idea to set up a separate bank account for your Disability benefits . If you are ordered by the court to pay child support , or have unpaid bills , then your Disability Insurance proceeds may be subject to garnishment .
If you are the beneficiary of a life insurance policy and you have a wage garnishment out against you , what can be garnished depends on the rules of the state . Federal law sets limits on what can be garnished , but states can add to those limitations . Consult an attorney if your wages are being garnished and you are set to become the beneficiary of a life insurance policy , or have recently received proceeds of a life insurance policy . If it is the deceased person who was insured by the life insurance policy whose wage were being garnished , or who owed substantial debt , the money received by the beneficiary is usually safe from creditors to whom the deceased owed money . If the insured person left his money to his estate , or there were no living beneficiaries on his policy to receive the death benefit , then creditors have access to money left to the estate . But money left to a person as beneficiary belongs to the beneficiary and is not accessible to creditors for the deceased .
The law varies from state to state regarding private disability insurance payments . If such payments are exempted from garnishment in your state , you should put those payments in a separate checking account . If they are mixed with your other funds , that checking account could be garnished . If you owe child support or payment on bills , your disability insurance payments may be garnished .
If someone dies while having a garnishment against them , the beneficiary will not be subject to the garnishment that was against the insured person . If it is the beneficiary who has a garnishment against them , the amount of the insurance proceeds that can be garnisheddepends on the rules of the state . Consult an attorney if your wages are being garnished and you are set to become the beneficiary of a life insurance policy , or have recently received proceeds of a life insurance policy .
Generally speaking , if the life insurance policy had a person named as Beneficiary , and the Insured person passed away , the benefits from that policy should go to the Beneficiary and be safe from garnishment for child support -LRB- if the garnishment was against the Insured -RRB- . If the Beneficiary stated in the policy is the estate , then the life insurance could be garnished for child support owed by the deceased . If the child support is owed by the Beneficiary , rules regarding wage garnishments against the Beneficiary of the life insurance proceeds vary by state . If you owe child support and are the Beneficiary of a life insurance policy in which the Insured passed away , there has to be a judgement made against you . Then , it varies by state whether any of the life insurance proceeds can be taken away from you for child support payment . You should contact legal counsel for the answer to this question .
If you are the beneficiary of a life insurance policy and it is the deceased who was under garnishment , your life insurance benefit can not be garnished on behalf of the deceased . If you get a life insurance benefit and you are the one who owes money , federal and state law determine how much -LRB- if any -RRB- of the death benefit can be garnished .
I have to take a small leap and assume you are talking about the death benefit you might have received or have received . Life Insurance itself can not be garnished however if the courts know you are receiving a death benefit , they may go after your bank accounts , etc. . Garnishments are generally taken from your salary at your place of employment . If this does not answer your question , please elaborate and get back to me . Thank you .
Life Insurance policies are paid out lump sum to the benificiary , so , this indicates that the benificiary has control of all monies and that the creditors will have no control for garnishment . Garnishment are for wages yet Life Insurance is a death benefit paid out at time of death of the policy holder to the beneficiary . This is not matter who has control of the policy at any time .
If you are renting an apartment , condo or home to live , you should have renter 's insurance . Not only will renter 's insurance cover your personal Property -LRB- contents -RRB- , but it also covers liability . Several years ago , I had a young women come into my office looking for advice on what she should do . She had been visiting her cousin , who lived in a town home . She went out on the back patio and lit a cigarette , smoked it & was sure she put it out in the dirt of a nearby planter . She and her cousin went out for dinner , only to return to the town home & the town home adjoined to be full a blaze with fire trucks putting out the fire . She was determined to be a fault . The insurance company of the adjoining home paid the claim and then subrogated -LRB- sued -RRB- her for the damages -LRB- ~ $ 105,000 -RRB- . Had she had renter 's insurance , it would have paid the claim under her liability portion of the policy . Instead , her wages were garnished and will continue to be garnished until the claim is paid in full .
I am not an attorney , but as far as I know a creditor can not garnish disability benefits . The benefits should be protected under the privacy act . I know it to be true for Tennessee and some other states , but I ca n't confirm all 52 states . Verify with an attorney but I am confident the benefits are free from creditors .
If you are asking whether the credit card company can garnish life insurance proceeds to pay off credit card debt left by the deceased , the answer is no , as long as the beneficiary of the life insurance policy is a living person . Creditors can go after the estate of the deceased for payment , so if the the beneficiary of the policy is the insured person 's `` estate '' , then the credit card company could have a shot at collecting from the life insurance benefit . If you are asking whether the cost of life insurance is counted as credit card debt , the answer is again no , not unless premiums are charged to a credit card .
In States that require Liability Insurance you can lose your license . In addition most companies will charge a higher rate for being without insurance . This law is a protection for both you and the other individual that may be involved in an accident that was your fault . The other individual can receive the medical treatment he needs and have his auto restored , you are protected from going through a lengthy lawsuit and having your wage garnished .
By far one of the most cost effective coverage options available is Renters Insurance . A policy for Renters Insurance not only covers the personal property of the insured for loss , damage or theft anywhere in the world , but also provides a level of Personal Liability insurance to protect the insured should they be sued for causing damage or injury to another person or their property - again , anywhere in the world this may have occurred . Typically , these policies provide for $ 100,000 in Personal Liability coverage , and can be increased for those who may want more coverage as well . Why would you want Personal Liability insurance ? I can tell you a hundred stories of renters who did n't have this coverage and were sued for something that happened , completely out of their control , and had to have their wages garnished to pay off the law suit .
That is a great question ! I believe that life insurance is a must , and while it can be used as part of a retirement plan , I 'm not real big on advising so . Here 's why - The general purpose for a life insurance policy is so that you can transfer wealth , and pay final expenses . Your beneficiary receives the tax free benefits , and your final expenses are not passed onto them . If your main goal is to gut your policy and live off the cash value in it , that defeats the purpose of the wealth transfer . If the idea is to garnish tax free income in retirement , a Roth IRA would be a far better investment vehicle , and its balance can be left to a beneficiary . A smarter way to use your money , though lesser commission for an agent . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
While I am not an attorney and can not speak for every situation , in most cases life insurance proceeds are protect from creditors and probate.There may be some situations that could result in garnishment however in most cases the answer would be no . Check with your attorney to verify your particular situation .
Under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- as of January 1 , 2014 , with limited exceptions Americans are required to have major medical insurance that meets the requirements of the Affordable Care Act . If you do not have such coverage in effect then you will be subject to a tax penalty when you do your 2015 taxes in 2015 . The penalty for 2014 is $ 95 per adult & $ 47.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 285 per family -RRB- or 1 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , whichever is greater . This tax penalty will increase in subsequent years . However , the tax penalty can only be recovered by the IRS from an income tax refund that an individual or family is entitled to . Your bank account or wages can not be garnished by the IRS to assess the tax penalty .
Renter 's insurance is important for two reasons . First , it covers your personal property -LRB- furniture , tv , audio system , clothes , dishes , etc -RRB- against loss . Second , it provides liability coverage . Let 's suppose you were cooking and a fire began because your attention was directed away . The fire that caused the damage was your fault , because you were negligent . The damage to the home or apartment you were renting may be more than what everything you own . In a recent case where the tenant did not have renter 's insurance , the cost of the damageswas recovered by garnishing the tenant 's wages by 30 % until the entire cost of the damages was recovered .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
Can You Borrow From Your Retirement Plan ?
Most qualified plans have borrowing provisions for plan participants . There is usually an interest charge as well as a payback schedule . Borrowing money fro your plan may restrict your ability to transfer funds to another plan or termination of your plan until it 's paid off . Tapping your retirement plan should be the last source of money you look to .
Can you borrow from your retirement plan ? Well , it will depend on your plan as it has to be written into the plan design . The question becomes why would you ? When you borrow from your plan you are removing money from the earning stream of your retirement account . That money borrowed no longer earns a return until repaid .
This is a pretty difficult question to answer in a forum like this . I highly recommend that you speak to a professionalone-on-one to completely evaluate your needs and to see if you can borrow - and if so , if it would be financially smart to borrow from a retirement fund . Feel free to contact me if you have no one else . To give you a little idea if you could however , here are some guidelines : Most retirement funds are NOT AVAILABLE to borrow from . If you have a Defined Benefit or a Cash Balance Benefit , you can not borrow from it . You can move your funds to a different account , with professional guidance to avoid penalties . But with these types of accounts , you usually can not touch until you retire . If you have a Profit Sharing account or a 401K - you MAY be able to borrow depending upon the rules of the company that it is through and/or the rules of the company you work for . Again , however , most will not allow you to borrow . If they do , typically you can only borrow 50 % of YOUR contributions -LRB- not what your company contributes -RRB- or $ 10k , whichever is less . Again , this is a very difficult and technical topic to get a solid answer here . Look me up if I can be of any further help .
How much can I borrow from my retirement plan ? Now if I could flick your ear like your dad used to do , I would say `` why would you want to ? '' Just because a loan provision can be included within your plan , it does n't mean you should exhaust EVERY other possibility first . Borrowing from your retirement plan is far and away the last possible choice to make . That said ... The limits for loans can be set by your plan . Borrowing provisions can be set up by your plan . Payback interest rate is set up by your plan . Your plan advisory board will decide if a loan request has merits . Usually the money you take from your plan is no longer participating in plan returns , so if you 're investment is earning 10 % and your loan payback provision is 4 % , you 're making 4 % on your money . If you get laid off or quit your job , your loan from your retirement plan is `` called '' immediately . Failure to pay it back when called results in a `` premature distribution '' which makes your `` loan '' income , along with a penalty , so your income taxes could change considerably . Try to remember just because a feature is available , does n't mean you should use it .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
You can borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have nay other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for .
You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
A life insurance loan is borrowing funds from the cash value inside of a life insurance policy . You can only borrow money from a life insurance policy if it 's a policy that builds cash value - a permanent life insurance program . Permanent life insurance includes both Universal and Whole life insurance programs . Term life insurance does not build cash value and therefore there 's nothing to borrow from . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you take a loan against your policy , the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies . If the insured person under the policy dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . Consult with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Can you borrow from your retirement plan ? Well , it will depend on your plan as it has to be written into the plan design . The question becomes why would you ? When you borrow from your plan you are removing money from the earning stream of your retirement account . That money borrowed no longer earns a return until repaid .
In Canada , you can not borrow directly from your retirement plan . Also you can not use your retirement plan as collateral for a loan . There is an indirect borrowing option with Retirement Compensation Agreement -LRB- RCA -RRB- where some lenders will use the refundable tax as collateral . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
You can contact the insurance company to request to borrow funds from the policy -LRB- your company 's policyholder services department should be able to handle it - they may request you complete a form for written documentation purposes -RRB- . The maximum amount you can borrow is up to the current surrender or loan value cited in the policy at the time you want to borrow from the cash value . Keep in mind , when you borrow money from the cash value , you are creating a loan against the policy -LRB- the funds are expected to be paid back and , much like you do when borrowing from a bank , an interest rate is being charged on the borrowed monies -RRB- . If the insured dies with an outstanding loan , the carrier will deduct the outstanding amount and any interest charges from the death benefit and give the difference to the beneficiary . I would recommend consulting with your agent before borrowing from the cash value to find out what will happen when you create a loan against the policy and what you 're responsible for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Can you borrow money from a retirement plan ? It 's going to depend on the plan that you are participating in . Since the term borrowing is involved , I will assume this is about borrowing from a 401k plan . The ability and the reasons allowed for borrowing are set by both government and administration of the plan . The government has some straight forward situations where loans can be granted . What a retirement plan committee can do though is add acceptable reasons for loans . The question becomes even if loan provisions are offered , should you use this as a source of loans ? Only as a last resort . Even though you get to pay yourself back at low interest , you have removed money from your investment pool that could earn more than a low interest rate . So you could be losing money by doing this . Then if for any reason you separate employment the loan balance is immediately due . and could be considered a distribution subject to penalty . Last choice .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
In Canada , when you borrow against your life insurance policy the amount you can borrow in stated in the life insurance policy . Important to remember , when you ask for a loan quote , to ask what if any of the amount borrowed will be taxable . Borrowing against a policy directly from the insurance company is considered a `` deemed disposition '' and can trigger a taxable event . When / if you repay the amount you receive a `` tax credit '' . Borrowing directly is private . If you use the policy as collateral from a bank , the loan is not a `` deemed disposition '' and therefore does not trigger a taxable event . The amount you can borrow varies , however , guidelines range from 50 % to 90 % depending on the type of policy and investment . There are consequence and alternatives to borrowing they should be discussed with a good local agent to ensure that you are informed . On a planning note , there are a number of strategies , that leverage individual and corporate borrowing . If you have further questions , contact me . If you are in Nova Scotia , you can request a complimentary strategy session at www.jpw.ca .
Can you withdraw from your retirement plan ? It 's actually going to depend on what your retirementplan actually is . In most cases a provision allows for withdrawals from a plan , though the retirement plan participant may incur a 10 % penalty from most plans for withdrawing funds . In some cases there may be more involved details . A retirement plan actually is one of the last places to visit when looking for funds . There are some pitfalls to borrowing or surrendering from your retirement plans .
A 401k is a designed as a retirement vehicle and it is not a good idea to take loans from it unless you absolutely have to . Most 401k plans do allow loans but there may be strict guidelines on making and administering them with some employers . The statutes place no specific restriction on the need or use of the loan , except that they have to be reasonably available to all 401k plan participants . However , the employer can restrict reasons for the loans . It is somewhat common for a plan to restrict the loan for educational expenses for a family member , pay un-reimbursed medical expenses or help purchase your first home . There are restrictions on how much of the 401k balance can be borrowed as well . The IRS says an employee can borrow $ 50,000 or 50 % of the vested account balance . If you are under age 591/2 and you leave your employer and the loan has not been repaid , the loan will be re-classified as income for that year and you would be taxed at ordinary income tax rates . In addition , there would be a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . When you borrow money from your 401k , you interrupt the concept of compounding your money and that can end up costing you a larger portion of your retirement account than you imagined . It is always best to pay back the 401k loan as quickly as possible to minimize the long-term effect on your retirement funds .
Can you borrow money from your retirement plan ? Well , it 's going to depend on what type of plan you have . Some plans do allow for the request of borrowing from your account , but should you ? There are considerations to be made if this is something you are thinking about are issues like removing money from your account that could be earning a greater return than the rate you 're borrowing from . In other words you 're taking out money earning 8 % and paying it back at 4 % . Also if you separate employment the loan becomes a distribution and is considered taxable income with a possible early withdraw penalty .
If the whole life policy has a cash value you can borrow from the insurance company using your policy as collateral . the amount you can borrow can be as high as 90 % . Check with your life insurance broker to be sure . In Canada , if you borrow in excess of the adjusted cost base of the policy , it will trigger a taxable event . If / when you repay the loan you receive an adjustment you can use when you file your taxes . If you borrow from a bank using the policy as collateral , it does not trigger a taxable event . Check with you life insurance broker , to be advised of the consequents of borrowing . If you do borrow reminder to at least pay the interest on the loan to avoid compound and putting the policy ar risk of lapsing . If you have further questions , or fell that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is The Retirement Plan For A Congressman ?
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
Before 1984 , Members of Congress received pensions that were based upon the Civil Service Retirement System . This is the same system used by other Federal employees . Members of Congress did not participate in the Social Security system . They were not eligible for social security benefits based upon their pay as Members of Congress . In 1983 Members of Congress and other federal employees , who were first hired after 1983 , were integrated into the Social Security System . Starting in 1984 all Members of Congress started participating in the Social Security System regardless of when they first entered Congress . Only those on the federal payroll prior to 1984 continue to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System . New Members of Congress since 1984 have participated in both Social Security and a new retirement program called the Federal Employees Retirement System . A Member of Congress can decline coverage in this program . Members elected prior to 1984 had the option of remaining on the Civil Service Retirement System or opting for the new Federal Employees Retirement System . The Civil Service Retirement program was not designed to be integrated with Social Security . The contributions and benefits from this program are much higher . When these benefits are combined with Social Security they can become substantial . Members of Congress can be covered under one of four different programs : 1 . Full coverage under Social Security and the old Civil Service Retirement System . 2 . An offset plan which includes both Social Security and the Civil Service Retirement System but the amount contributed to the CSRS is reduced by the amount paid into Social Security . 3 . The Federal Retirement System and Social Security 4 . Social Security alone . The pensions for Members of Congress are financed through a combination of contributions from the Congressman and from the Federal Governmenttheir employer . When they pay Social Security payroll taxes they pay the standard 6.2 % required of other employees . If they remained in the Civil Service Retirement System they pay an additional 7 % of their pay . If they opted for the Federal Retirement System they pay an additional .8 % of their pay . When they retire a Member of Congress can receive benefits in much the same way other federal employees do . They can file for and receive benefits under Social Security and they can apply for benefits under the retirement program they have adopted . The retirement benefit itself is based upon reaching at least age 62 and is a function of years of service and income in the highest three years of covered salary . The benefit generated under the Civil Service Retirement System is much greater than the benefit under the Federal Retirement System . By law , the benefit paid to a Member of Congress can not exceed eighty percent of the final pay of the Member of Congress . There are around 500 Members of Congress drawing pensions today . Their average pension in 2006 was under $ 35,000 . Members of Congress who elect an immediate annuity can also maintain the health insurance that they had as federal employees . Members of Congress that elect the FERS program are also eligible for a thrift savings program in which contributions are matched to a certain level .
That is a great question ! The answer is yes , probably , depending upon where you live . Here in Houston , it went up about 4 % , but there are other parts of the country where prices declined , or went up higher than ours , as the insurers got more comfortable with the client base and costs . Overall , the price increases have been very minimal compared to what they were pre-ACA , but if the new Congress and Supreme Court get the bill gutted like they want , then we can most likely expect that the double digit increases return in 2016 . Let 's hope not , especially if you 're one of the people who benefited from the subsidy , or the demise of the pre-existing condition exclusion . If you are , I 'd be writing a Congressman , or three , and a Judge or two to boot ... Thank you for asking !
Not at this time . Medicare could face some changes down the road however . Do not let the political scare tactics of either party cause you undo concern . At the same time it is good to keep informed of any changes and if you disagree with those changes then contact your congressman .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
In order to determine what is the best retirement plan , you first need to clarify what you are trying to accomplish . What does a successful retirement look like for you ? Once you have an idea what that means then you will be able to calculate what it will cost to fund it . The would will be able to determine what is best for you . Additional information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
Is an annuity a qualified retirement plan ? NO . An annuity can be `` used '' in or as part of a qualified retirement plan . An annuity on it 's own is not a qualified retirement plan . Where people get confused terminology wise is when they have a product -LRB- like an annuity -RRB- in their retirement plan , so they consider the annuity to `` be '' the retirement plan . The easiest way to think of retirement plans is they are a box , that stuff goes into . A qualified retirement plan is a box that you can put stocks , bonds , mutual funds and annuities into . The `` box '' is what makes them `` qualified . ''
If you are asking how do youcalculate how much do you need to save for retirement there is a process to follow . First you need to determine what retirement success looks like to you . Your retirement planner may be trained to help you if not a lifestyle planner could . The next step to figure out what that lifestyle wouldcostand make a retirementbudget . Now you can do somemeaningfulcalculations . Total up what income you expect from any government plans , pensionplans , etc. . Compare this amount to your retirement lifestyle budget . The difference is what needs to be funded byadditionalsavings . There are calculators on the websites of financialinstitutionsto give you an idea . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
What a retirement plan does is provide financial security . If you are referring to a Registered Retirement Plan then then plan enjoys tax deferred growth . The income is taxed on withdrawal , but tax deferred growth allows for the full effect of compound growth . If you referring to a retirement plan , then you are working towards having what you want to happen , happen . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
As with most plans , ideally first determine the end goal - what does a successful retirement look like to you . Understanding what your objectives are will help you when deciding what direction to take and how much is needed for funding . When designing a retirement plan , taxation is an important factor , you want to take full advantage of the `` miracle of compound interest '' by using tax sheltered growth . Also whether or not contributions are deductible is also a consideration . What about taxation of the income received at retirement . . You will find additional information on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
With financial planing , determining your objectives is the first step . Retirement planning is no different , it is a two part process . First you need to decide what a successful retirement would look like for you and then you need to plan how to fund it . What do you want to do in retirement ? Spend some time discussing this and writing down your objectives . One you have an outline , you can work with a financial planner to design a plan to accomplish your objectives . There is more information on retirement planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
At What Age Can You Go On Medicare ?
You can go on Medicare at age 65 . If you have been disabled for two years you can go on Medicare at that time , regardless of your age . You may be able to go on Medicare prior to age 65 if you have end stage renal disease or have Lou Gherig 's disease , under certain conditions .
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
You can go on Medicare at age 65 . If you have been disabled for two years you can go on Medicare at that time , regardless of your age . You may be able to go on Medicare prior to age 65 if you have end stage renal disease or have Lou Gherig 's disease , under certain conditions .
Let 's review the history of Medicare . When Medicare was introduced in 1965 Medicare included Part A -LRB- hospital -RRB- and Part B -LRB- outpatient -RRB- . Then the Part D was added to cover the drugs . So now we have Part A , Part B , and Part D. Part C-Medicare Advantage combines Part A , B , and D into one policy - Part C. Medicare purchasing decisions are based on the question of can I afford to pay for a medicare supplement and a drug plan plus the medicare supplement premium will increase each year . Depending which State and what County that live in many Medicare Advantage Plans -LRB- Part C -RRB- have a zero premium while they include coverage for Part A , B , & D . What is the catch ? First of all you need to understand once you make the decision to go the Medicare Advantage Plan way you will only be able to purchase a medicare supplement plan in the future only if you pass underwriting questions . So if you have developed heart conditions , diabetes , etc. then you will have to stay with Medicare Advantage or be prepared to cover the Part A deductible and all the Part B charges not covered by Medicare . Medicare Advantage has copays that are required each time visit the doctor-typically that range from $ 20 for primary care physician to $ 50 for specialist . Obviously , the more times you go to the doctor the more it pays for you to stay with original medicare
People typically go on Medicare Part A & B when they turn age 65 . From there , they decide on getting a Medicare Supplement or a Medicare Advantage plan to cover what Medicare Part A & B does not cover . If you are on a group plan from an employer you may be able to delay getting Part B until you retire . Some folks can go on to Medicare before age 65 if they have certain health issues .
I am going to answer your question by qualfying what I think you are asking . Under original medicare as long as the doctor is contracted to accept medicare then you can basically go to any doctor . What if you live in Detroit and you prefer to go to a doctor in California ? Medicare is going to want to know why when you live in Detroit and you are seeing a doctor in California . Under the Medicare Advantage Plans you need to understand the terms HMO , PPO , PFFS , in order to assure you are getting the care in `` network '' .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A medigap policy is also known as a Medicare Supplement policy . These policies are issued by a number of insurance companies in response to the out of pocket expenses that are not covered by Medicare , part A and Part B . A medigap policy is almost necessary for all Medicare participants . There can be massive out-of-pocket expenses in Medicare and the money that could be provided by the plan far outweigh the cost of the plan . These plans were developed by private companies . In response to the wide variety of policies developed the federal government decided to regulate these policies in the 1980s . The desire was to provide uniformity of benefits . There are ten different medigap policies available . They are referenced by letters A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M and N. Although these plans can change from time to time they have maintained these designations . Companies are not required to identify their policy by these letters and will often introduce stylized names such as Senior Select Medigap policy . It is most important to understand that all of the plans must contain core benefits . As they add additional benefits they must fall into one of the letter categories . This helps to compare plans and to insure that your needs are properly covered . You can enroll in a medigap policy during certain periods . During those periods the policy is guaranteed to be issued without medical underwriting . If the policy is desired after the set period medical underwriting can be required and the premium can be altered . The open enrollment period begins on the first day of the month in which you reach age 65 or older and enroll in Medicare Part B . This enrollment period continues for six months . People who are disenrolling from Medicare Advantage can receive a guaranteed issued medigap policy for 12 months when they enroll in traditional Medicare . There are other circumstances under which a person would be eligible for a Medigap policy without providing evidence of insurance . There are five core benefits contained in every medigap plan . The first is that the plan will pay the Medicare Part A copayments for days 61-90 . These copayments were $ 289 per day of hospitalization in 2012 . Another core benefit is Medicare Part A lifetime reserve copayments for days 91-150 . These copayments are $ 578 per day in 2012 . Another core benefit is up to 365 additional days of hospital stay beyond Medicare coverage . The medigap policies also provide cover the Medicare Part B coinsurance . This doesnt apply to preventive services , and the first three pints of blood if needed . These core benefits comprise an A plan . Subsequent plans offer increased benefits which include skilled nursing facility care copayments for days 21-100 . That cost was $ 144.50 in 2012 . The plan can provide for the Medicare Part A hospital deductible . That amount was $ 1184 in 2013 . The plan can provide the annual Medicare Part B deductible which was $ 147 in 2013 . Some plans include coverage for the Medicare Part B excess charges . Several plans include foreign travel emergency coverage . Every plan is priced by the insurance company . Sometimes the company offers the plan based upon the community . In other cases the pricing is determined by the age at which the plan is initiated . In other cases the plan is based on attained age and can increase as the policyholder ages . The core benefits can save you a great deal of money . Selecting the additional benefits is probably best done with a counsellor that you trust .
Social Security disability insurance pays benefits to you and certain members of your family if you have earned enough work credits to be considered `` insured '' . Four work credits can be earned each year . In 2014 , you receive one work credit for each $ 1200 of earnings , up to the yearly maximum of four credits . How many credits you need for disability benefits depends on how old you are when you are disabled . If you become disabled prior to age 24 , you need 11/2 years of work -LRB- 6 credits -RRB- in the three years before you became disabled . For ages 24-30 , you need credits for half of the time between age 21 and when you became disabled . If you are 31 or older , you need at least 20 credits during the 10 year period preceding when you were disabled . Like most things associated with Social Security , it is a bit more complicated than this example . Remember , the worker has to have paid into Social Security to be qualified . There are `` survivor '' benefits as well . When a person who has worked and paid Social Security taxes dies , certain members of their family may be eligible for survivors benefits . Up to ten years of work is need to be eligible , depending on the person 's age at the time of death . A widow/widower can claim full benefits at their full retirement age and reduced benefits at age 60 . A disabled widow/widower can claim as early as age 50 . Divorced spouses under certain conditions can also claim survivor benefits . Unmarried children under age 18 -LRB- 19 if they are full time in elementary or secondary school -RRB- , some step-children , adopted children and grand children can also receive survivor benefits . There are many other situations where survivor benefits can be claimed such as a widow or widower of any age that takes care of a deceased person 's child under the age of 16 or disabled , and receiving Social Security benefits . Children who were disabled prior to their age 22 and remain disabled , and in some cases , dependent parents who are age 62 or older . As you can see , there are a lot of rules and regulations surrounding disability benefits for Social Security . Seek out someone who knows the rules .
Knowing what life insurance term you should get is something you can best discern for yourself , when you understand how term life insurance is priced . When you purchase a term life insurance policy , you are usually locking in the premium so that it will not go up for a certain number of years . This can be as short as one year or as long as 30 + years . When you choose a longer term , you will find the price is much higher than the premium for a shorter term . That is because the policy is covering a greater risk as you get older . E.g. . If you are age 40 now and take out a 10 year term policy , that policy is only covering you to age 50 . If you take out a 30 year term policy , it is covering you to age 70 . The chance of your dying at age 70 is much greater than at age 50 . And life insurance costs are higher where there is greater risk of death . Term policies roughly average out the cost of insurance for each year you have the policy , and charge you that same price for the entire term . So in the first years of the policy , you are paying more than a person your age would be paying for that risk . In the latter years , you are paying less than a person that age would normally be paying . The advantage to longer terms really shows up when health is taken into account . You may have no trouble getting a preferred rating at age 40 . But to get rated preferred at age 50 or 60 is not as likely . Therefore , having a preferred rating locked in for 30 years offers a huge price advantage to the poor soul who gets rated preferred for a 10 year term policy at age 40 , standard at age 50 , and table 4 at age 60 . Getting longer terms is not for everyone . If you definitely only have a short term need , there is no reason to pay the higher cost of a longer term policy . But IF there is a chance you may need longer coverage , as you can see , locking it in while you are healthy is never a bad idea .
If the only conversion option your policy offers is Whole Life , the rate is probably going to be quite a bit higher than if you take out a new , no lapse , Universal Life policy . However , when you convert Term Life , you are rated the same on your Whole Life that you were rated on your Term policy . So if your health has declined , you may be getting a good deal by converting . If it has not declined , I personally would check out a new policy to see how much you can save . As to when to convert , it depends on several factors . 1 . HOW MUCH you want to convert . If you want to convert it all , it may be a good idea to do it now , while rates are lower . They will go up quite a bit over the next 10 years . 2 . YOUR HEALTH . If you have very poor health , you may just want to pay those low Term rates another 10 years . If you have excellent health , it might be a good time to convert or look at what else you can get in a permanent policy . 3 . WILL YOU NEED LIFE INSURANCE after age 60 ? By the time you are 60 you should have a good idea of whether you will need that much coverage . You have some time to get a feel for how your retirement is going to pan out before you make this big decision . You can not reverse it and go back to Term , once you have converted your policy . Please feel free to contact me to help you ascertain what prices are out there for you , or help you figure out what direction to go . Best wishes .
In terms of Original Medicare , most people who are citizens or permanent residents of the United States can get premium free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- at age 65 or older . At age 65 , you are eligible if : You receive or are eligible for Social Security benefits . You receive or are eligible to receive railroad retirement benefits . You or your spouse -LRB- living or deceased , including divorced spouses -RRB- worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes . You are the dependent parent of a fully insured deceased child . Before age 65 , you are eligible for free Medicare Part A -LRB- hospital insurance -RRB- if : Youve been entitled to receive Social Security disability benefits for 24 months . You receive a disability pension from the railroad retirement board and meet certain conditions . If you receive Social Security disability benefits because you have Lou Gehrigs disease . You worked long enough in a government job and paid Medicare taxes and you meet Social Security disability program requirements . You are the child or widow -LRB- er -RRB- age 50 or older . This includes a divorced widow -LRB- er -RRB- , of someone who has worked long enough in a government job where Medicare taxes were paid and you meet the Social Security disability program requirements . You receive maintenance dialysis or a kidney transplant because you have permanent kidney failure . You are eligible for or you already receive monthly benefits under Social Security or the railroad retirement system . You have met the required amount of time working in a Medicare covered government job . You are the child or spouse -LRB- also includes a divorced spouse -RRB- of a worker -LRB- living or deceased -RRB- who has worked long enough under Social Security or in a government -LRB- Medicare-covered -RRB- job .
That is an excellent question ! Life insurance companies base the cost of your policy on your age , your health , whether you smoke , and the amount of coverage that you want . At your age , you have a couple of routes you can go , depending upon what you can afford . A whole life policy will be a little bit more expensive than a term policy would be , but will over time , become a better value in that you build cash in it , and if your health were to take a serious hit , your rates wo n't go up because ofit . If you are really strapped for cash , a short term policy might be the way to go , until you can afford the whole life policy . Either way , your policy should be fairly inexpensive . If you would like a more accurate dollar amount , please contact me , and I 'll go over it privately with you . Thanks for asking !
Age 65 is the age at which you are automatically enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B , if you have worked and paid Medicare taxes long enough to qualify for Medicare , and if you are drawing Social Security at age 65 . If you are not drawing Social Security at that age you must enroll in Medicare . You can qualify at a younger age if you have been receiving SSDI for two years or have ESRD or ALS .
Financial ratings really do n't matter when it comes to Medicare supplement insurance . All Medicare supplement plans are identical , and all pay claims on a timely basis . There are considerable consumer protections included in Medicare supplement plans . If your Medicare supplement carrier gets in financial trouble or decides to exit the market you have a `` free pass '' to apply for any plan with any other carrier , regardless of your health . The best Medicare supplemental insurance plan in your state is one that matches your needs and budget . Medigap insurance rates vary considerably by zip code , age , tobacco use and plan . The older you are the higher your Medicare supplement rate will be . The exception is for those who are under age 65 and on disability and Medicare . In most states rates for under age 65 are astronomical . Many carriers offer competitive rates from age 65 to 74 . Above age 74 some plans -LRB- surprisingly -RRB- become more competitive while others less so . Tobacco use often adds 20 % to the rate but can be more , depending on the carrier . Plan F is the most expensive -LRB- and most popular -RRB- followed by D or G -LRB- depending on your state -RRB- , N then Hi F which is the least expensive . You can generally find a site that offers `` instant Medigap quotes '' but keep in mind the most competitive rates are usually not illustrated online . #GeorgiaMedigapPlanRates #GeorgiaMedicarePlans #GaMedigapQuotes
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Choosing a Medicare Plan can seem confusing when doing it for the first time . You have several things to consider . First , do you want a Medicare Supplement Plan or a Medicare Advantage plan ? Sometimes , people like to compare plans online first just to get an idea and they can do that on our website . However , it is important to also to speak with an independent agent that can explain the pros and cons of each plan and how that plan may fit your needs the best . You will always be able to tell a Medicare Supplement Plan -LRB- or a Medigap Plan -RRB- because they have a letter like Plan F or Plan G , etc. . Medicare along with a Medicare Supplement is actually great health insurance . Some of the great things about a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is : 1 . No Network - you can go to any doctor or hospital you want . If they take Medicare , they take the supplement . 2 . No referral needed to go to a specialist . 3 . Once you have a plan , the benefits on that plan can not change from year to year . 4 . No large out of pocket surprises when you go to the doctor or hospital
If you are age 65 when you receive Social Security benefits , you will automatically be signed up for Medicare at age 65 . If you are not yet receiving Social Security benefits , you can still sign up for Medicare benefits at age 65 . When relying on your spouse 's eligibility , you can get Medicare at age 65 if your spouse is at least age 62 .
When you qualify for Medicare there are two basic choices , you can keep original Medicare and purchase a Medicare Supplement and Prescription drug plan or you can enroll in a Medicare Advantage Plan . Medicare Supplements have a variety of coverage options . Medicare Advantage Plans basically take the place of original Medicare in that administration is taken over by the insurance company . You have HMO 's . These plans have a network that you MUST use . PPO 's or Preferred Provider Organizations , you can use any provider but the copay 's are less if you stay in network . You also have a few Private Fee For Service plans still out there . These are less popular because even though you can go to any doctor , that doctor can refuse coverage on a visit by visit basis . These are the most common plans available . A good agent specializing in the needs of seniors can go into more detail on how they work and the options available .
Globe life 's big pitch is to get up to $ 50,000 of coverage for $ 1 . Sounds great right ? That 's only for the first month - after that you 're paying normal premium amounts . One of the programs they are famous for with this pitch is their `` final expense '' coverage . In actuality it 's age-banded term insurance going to age 90 . Age-banded term insurance can be cheaper up front for the first few years than a traditional level premium life insurance policy , but they become very expensive if you plan on keeping it long term . In short , you can end up spending a ton more in premiums over a 15-20 year period than you would have with a level premium policy . The major drawback that a lot of people never think about is the `` to age 90 '' part . This means that if you live to age 91 , your coverage terminates immediately and you have nothing left . And at age 91 , there are n't any carriers that will offer you life insurance -LRB- for any that would be , you would be self-insured within 3-4 years -RRB- . You would have to look at preneed funeral insurance at that point . Traditional final expense policies are guaranteed for LIFE . I imagine you would like your policy to pay out a death benefit even if you live to age 92 , 95 , 98 , etc. . . When it comes to final expense life insurance , I already recommend going with a traditional policy that features a level premium . It 's almost always the better bet in the long run . There 's many different products out there for final expense coverage so it would be in your best interest to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can compare multiple options for you and find you the coverage at the lowest rate . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
When Can You Sign Up For Medicare B ?
You can sign up for Medicare Part B at the same time that you sign up for Medicare Part A , or you can wait to sign up for Part B until you have stopped working and no longer have group coverage . If you are receiving Social Security benefits , you will be signed up for Part A and B automatically just before your 65th birthday .
Your initial open enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs when you 're turning 65 years old . It 's a 7-month window that starts 3 months before your birth month and ends 3 months after . If you enroll in during the 3 months prior to your birth month , then your effective date will be the 1st of your birth month . If you enroll during your birth month , your effective date will be the 1st day of the following month . If you enroll 1 month after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 2 months after you sign up . If you enroll 2 months or 3 months after you turn 65 , then your effective date will be 3 months after you sign up . To avoid being hit with any delays , it is ideal to sign up during the 3 months prior to your birth month so it starts the month you turn 65 . Note - when you enroll in Medicare Part B , it activates your 6-month open enrollment period to buy a Medicare Supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Medigap plans covers what Medicare Part B does n't cover . This is the best time to buy a Medigap plan because you can secure any Medigap plan without any medical underwriting . This means that you can buy a plan regardless of what your medical history is . You also have the `` general enrollment period '' available to you if you do not sign up when you first turned 65 . This enrollment period for Medicare Part B occurs from January 1st through March 31st of each year . During this time , you can sign up for Medicare Part B if you did not do so when you turned 65 and do not have a special enrollment period available to you . Please note , if you sign up during the general enrollment period for Medicare Part B , the effective date for the coverage will be July 1st . You may also be subject to a late enrollment penalty if you enroll in Medicare Part B after your initial open enrollment period - calculated as a 10 % penalty for each 12-month period you could have had Part B and went without it . You may also have a `` special enrollment period '' available to you . A common scenario when this occurs is when someone comes off of group coverage through an employer . The effective date of your Medicare Part B coverage would be the first of the following month after you sign up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare Supplement plan needs and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B at the same time that you sign up for Medicare Part A , or you can wait to sign up for Part B until you have stopped working and no longer have group coverage . If you are receiving Social Security benefits , you will be signed up for Part A and B automatically just before your 65th birthday .
If you signed up for Medicare Part A & Part B during your initial enrollment period , then your effective date will be either the first of the month you turn 65 -LRB- this is the case for most individuals -RRB- or 2 or 3 months after -LRB- if you signed up after the month you turned 65 -RRB- . If you decided to wait because you were still working -LRB- e.g. on a group health plan through your employer -RRB- , then you may be eligible for a special enrollment period and set up an effective date for the first of the following month -LRB- you 'll likely need to complete the Part B enrollment at your local social security office -RRB- . If you decided to wait on signing up for Part B and do not have a special enrollment period , then you would be looking at signing up during the general enrollment period -LRB- January 1-March 31 of each year -RRB- . If you 're signing up during this window , then your effective date would be July 1 .
You can also go to the website for the Social Security Administration at www.SSA.gov for information and to sign up . One important thing to remember when signing up for Medicare in Texas is that you have a one time open enrollment period when you first sign up for Medicare Part B . This means there are no health underwriting questions and you can select any Medicare Supplement plan available . Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of your medical costs . The Medicare Supplement is designed to cover the remaining 20 % or some variation depending on what plan you go with . We have helped many clients through the Medicare Supplement process in Texas . You can compare Texas Medicare Supplement Plans instantly on our website at SummitMedigap.com or give us a call at 1-888-407-8664 .
For most people , you can get Medicare Part B when you turn age 65 . You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to your local Social Security office or you can do it online at www.SSA.gov . It is also best to consider what type of Medicare Supplement you will need . You can review plans several months prior to getting your Medicare Part B and you can submit the application ahead of time . By doing this you can then have your Medicare Supplement have the same effective date as the Medicare Part B. Medicare Part A & B only covers about 80 % of the costs so people get a supplement to cover the difference . Medicare along with a supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- is great health insurance . You can go to our website for more information about Medicare Part B and Medicare Supplement information .
The main way to qualify for Medicare is to be turning 65 year sold . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care .
If you are age 65 and have begun receiving Social Security benefits , you will automatically be signed up for Medicare Part A and B . You can sign up for an Advantage Plan or get Medicare Part D -LRB- or other letters -RRB- at that time , as well . You sign up for Medicare by visiting your local Social Security office , going to Medicare.gov -LRB- where you will be directed to a website where you can sign up -RRB- , or calling 1-800-MEDICARE .
Qualifying for Medicare , in general , is a pretty simple and straight-forward process - the most common way people qualify is by turning age 65 . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov , or at your local social security administration office . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care . You may also want to look into adding a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan as well if you would like to have your coverage for prescriptions as well .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B late , but there may be penalties . If you do not enroll in Medicare Part B when you first become eligible , you can enroll during the open enrollment period from January 1 and March 31 each year . If you sign up during this period , your plan will become effective July 1 . You will be charged an additional 10 % on your premium for every 12 months you went without coverage . However , if you did n't enroll because you were covered by a different insurance plan , you can sign up during the eight months following the end of that plan without a penalty .
Everyone should sign up for Medicare Part A & Part B when you 're first eligible -LRB- generally this is when you 're turning 65 years old -RRB- so you do n't get hit with any late enrollment penalties -LRB- there are ways to avoid the late enrollment penalty such as signing up when you 're coming off group health insurance -RRB- . When you enroll in Part B , you begin your initial open enrollment period -LRB- a 6-month timeframe -RRB- to apply for a Medicare supplement policy with no medical underwriting . You can apply for Medicare benefits on the social security administration website , ssa.gov . If you need quotes for Medicare supplements , send me a private message and we can go over the input so we can find the program that 's right for you .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B by going to the website medicare.gov . There is an online form that explains about Medicare Part B and allows you to sign up right there . Or you can visit your local Social Security office to sign up , or call Social Security at 1-800-633-4227 .
You can get Part B when you qualify for Medicare at age 65 or are on Social Security Disability for two years . If you opt out of Part B when you first qualified due to being covered under a group plan , then you can enroll in Part B when your group benefits terminate . If you did not sign up during your initial enrollment period or special enrollment period , then you may sign up during the General Enrollment Period Jan 1st through March 31 each year .
Most people will pay $ 104.90 per month for their Part B premium in 2013 . This may be higher for people with high incomes . However , if you do n't sign up for Part B when you 're first eligible , you may have to pay a late enrollment penalty for as long as you have Medicare . Your monthly premium for Part B may go up 10 % for each full 12-month period that you could have had Part B , but did n't sign up for it .
The only persons who may not want to enroll in Medicare Part B are those who have a group plan that has features better than Medicare Part B , and for which the group policy would be the primary payer . There is no penalty to wait until your group plan ends , to sign up for Part B Medicare . If you are an active duty service member and age 65 , you could also wait to sign up for Part B. For everyone else who qualifies , enrolling in Part B is reasonably priced and something you have paid into . Unless you have moral reasons against it , prefer private coverage , or are able to insure yourself , I know of no reasons to not enroll in it .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Kidney dialysis is a Medicare Part B service . If you have End-Stage Renal Disease -LRB- also known as ESRD -RRB- , Medicare will -LRB- generally -RRB- coverthree dialysis treatments per week . You pay 20 % of the Medicare approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . This is where your Medigap Plan will help cover some if not all of the remaining costs . Medigap Plan F will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible . You pay $ 0 . Medigap Plan G will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . You pay , at most , $ 147 -LRB- Part B deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plans A , B , D , M will pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible . However , you are also responsible for Part B Excess Charges , so you may end up paying more than the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Cwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount and the applicable Part B deductible ; however , you pay for any Medicare Part B Excess Charges . Medigap Plan Hi-F will pay all Medicare approved amounts after you have met/paid the $ 2,140 deductible -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Medigap Plan Nwill pay the remaining 20 % of the Medicare approved amount after you have paid/met the applicable Part B deductible -- except for a copay of up to $ 20 for some office visits . You are also responsible for paying Medicare Part B Excess Charges . In regards to Excess Charges , this is what you are charged above the Medicare approved amount if the doctor , provider , or supplier does not accept Assignment . If a provider does not accept Assignment , they are telling Medicare that they do not agree to accept the payment amount Medicare approves for the service -- this is how you can get billed for Part B Excess Charges .
You can buy into Medicare after age 65 . There is a general enrollment period between January 1 and March 31 of each year during which you can sign up for Medicare . If you are not eligible for free Medicare Part A , the premium you pay may be higher than if you had signed up at age 65 . However , if you did not sign up for Medicare Part A and/or B due to being covered by a group health plan , you can enroll without penalty in the 8 month period after your quit working or the group coverage ends .
You can sign up for Medicare online at medicare.gov . If you are nearing age 65 , you can sign up in the three months before or after the month of your 65th birthday . If you would rather sign up by phone , you can call 1-800-MEDICARE -LRB- 1-800-633-4227 -RRB- . Or you can go to your local Social Security Office to sign up for Medicare .
You can sign up for Medicare Part B online at medicare.gov . The website offers information about when and how to apply , along with a form that you can fill in and submit online . If you would rather call to sign up , you can call Social Security at1-800-772-1213 . Or you can sign up at your local Social Security office .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Does Renters Insurance Cover Me If I Move ?
The standard renters insurance policy form , the HO-4 , often contains language giving you 30 days of coverage at both your old home and your `` newly acquired principal residence . '' However , it 's important to inform your insurance agent of the move . If you move to a lower risk area , doing so may even save you a few dollars . Since insurance policies vary by individual state laws , if you move between states your insurance agent will write a new policy for the new state and transfer money you 've pre-paid to the new policy . Be aware that not all renters insurance policies are written on the HO-4 form . For example , the HO-BT policy form which is specific to Texas renters insurance will cover the personal property at each location only based on the proportion of the total property which is at that location . The HO-BT also provides the lesser of $ 1,000 or 10 % of the total personal property coverage for property in transit between your old home and your new one .
Renters may move with you if all other underwriting guidelines remain the same . I am assuming that you are moving withing the state and not across state lines . I am assuming that you are not moving to flood zone within the state that require flood insurance . You are also not moving from an apartment to a mobile or trailer home . All things being equal your your renters insurance moves with you .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
The standard renters insurance policy form , the HO-4 , often contains language giving you 30 days of coverage at both your old home and your `` newly acquired principal residence . '' However , it 's important to inform your insurance agent of the move . If you move to a lower risk area , doing so may even save you a few dollars . Since insurance policies vary by individual state laws , if you move between states your insurance agent will write a new policy for the new state and transfer money you 've pre-paid to the new policy . Be aware that not all renters insurance policies are written on the HO-4 form . For example , the HO-BT policy form which is specific to Texas renters insurance will cover the personal property at each location only based on the proportion of the total property which is at that location . The HO-BT also provides the lesser of $ 1,000 or 10 % of the total personal property coverage for property in transit between your old home and your new one .
A renter 's policy is the same as a homeowner 's policy except that it does not cover the building itself . You should have largely the same expectations from a renter 's policy as you woulda homeowner 's policy . So in the event of a covered claim you could be compensated for your physical loss of possessionsas well asextra living expenses associated with having to move afterthe claim . Renter 's policies also provide liability coverage to you and your family . This is very broad coverage that could cover anything from slip and trip exposures around the house to certain misfortunes that happen away from home as well . Talk to your broker to find out everything a renter 's policy covers and what endorsements you need .
Renters Insurance is available for tenants in all States . Renters Insurance Policies cover personal property , additional living expenses , personal liability and medical payments to others . Renters Insurance can be purchased by tenants renting houses , apartment units , condos and townhomes . Renters Insurance is transferrable from one rental unit to another when the insured moves ; however , it is not transferrable across State lines since policies need to be rewritten according to State Department of Insurance regulations which are different in each State . Stillwater Insurance Group offers the most affordable options for renters ; there is also an online self service renters insurance platform available directly for clients ' use : WEBSITELINK Using the above link , you may obtain a free quote and purchase your insurance contract directly online . For further questions regarding any details , you may contact a licensed representative at : -LRB-877-RRB-931-3368 .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
I would have to say no . A renters policy is typically written for an married couple or an individual . If you moved you would have to secure a new policy based on the information about the new residence . The same would hold true for the person moving into the premise that you are currently renting . When they move in , they will have to secure a new renters policy based on the property information and their personal information . Insurance is not one size fits all . It is tailored to the individual . Remember every policy is different please read your policy completely to know what coverage is offered and what exclusions there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Renters Insurance can not be transferred from one tenant to another tenant ; the named insured can not transfer the insurance to another person . However , if the named insured moves to a new rental location , the location can be changed by request to the Carrier 's Customer Service department in writing or online -LRB- if available -RRB- . If the named insured is moving to another State , the policy will need to be rewritten as policy forms are approved separately by each independent State thus requiring a rewrite to the new State . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States should you be unable to make a change to your current renters insurance policy based on your current situation . An exemplary online solution for all ! WEBSITELINK Should you need additional assistance , please contact a licensed professional to answer your specific questions !
The entity that is renting the property to the ` renter or renters ' is typically the homeowner policyholder . It could be an organization , corporation or individual who holds the homeowner policy . The owner of the residence pays for their own policy . They are the ` landlord ' in common terms . The renter may be required by the owner , to carry a renter 's insurance policy but the two policies are different . Even if the renter is not required to have a renter 's policy , it is a wise move to purchase one , as the premiums are usually relatively low and the coverages are fairly extensive , primarily for losses and damages to personal property and also for liability coverage for accidental injury to others .
A landlord can require that the tenant have a renters policy . As a tenant you can elect to move out . It is more likely that you would never move in . This is not a state law rather it is just a condition of the rental contract . Tenants often feel that the landlords insurance covers their property and it doesnt . They also are not aware that if someone is injured inside their unit , they are responsible , not the landlord . A renters policy covers these issues .
Renters Insurance polices have a coverage called loss of use or additional living expense . How this coverage works is : If there was a covered loss such as a fire for example that caused you to move out of your residence , because the residence became unlivable due to the loss then your renters policy under the additional living expanse coverage would pick up the Hotel for temporary housing until you were able to move back in .
Renters Insurance is NOT a legal requirement however that does not mean it is not required to move into an apartment or house . The landlord can and usually does make this a requirement which protects you from loss of your material possessions in the event of a fire or other catastrophic event covered . Be sure to look at your options on the Renters Insurance . I recommend getting the replacement value type of coverage v. current value . Think about what it will cost to replace items like your TV -LRB- versus what it is currently worth -RRB- , your mattress and other bedroom furniture , etc. .
I just wrote a renters policy and the annual premium was $ 92 / year . While that is on the low side , it does illustrate that the cost of a renters policy is not significant . However the cost of not having a renters policy can be significant . A lawsuit can bankrupts you . A fire can destroy everything that you own . If you are forced to move out you might find that alternative housing is significantly more expensive .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
Let 's say you have a renters policy in one state and you move to another state where your insurer does not even do business . This happens all the time . I would advise you do two things . 1 -RRB- wait until the physical move is over with and 2 -RRB- wait till you have in your hands the replacement policy . Then it is safe to mail the original policy back to your agent or company and ask for the policy to be cancelled . Privacy concerns would require that you either send the original policy back , or the company may require more specific information form you to effect cancellation to be sure the person saying to cancel a policy is in fact you . Many states authorize the manner in which cancellations take place , so talk to your insurance professional . At the Insurance Browser Inc. we are licensed in several states so if you move from GA to Texas we can handle the whole transaction , old and new .
This is a really good question ! I am glad that you asked it , because it tells me that you 've looked at the alternatives . Here 's what I tell my clients : If you have the money set aside to cover your funeral expenses , pay your debts , and leave a comfortable income for your spouse or children that you know you wo n't have to dip into , then it does n't . If you only need to cover a specific , ending debt like a college expense or mortgage , then it does n't . However , if you are looking for a way to provide protection no matter how long you will live , -LRB- You can not outlive this coverage , unlike a term policy -RRB- this is your policy . If there is a chance that you may need to borrow money at some point , and your credit rating or history makes it unlikely that you will be able to secure a loan , this may be your policy . If you have a desire to move money to loved ones , or a charity in a way that is tax free to them , and not counted as income , this may be your policy . This kind of policy also makes sense if purchased when you are young , as the premiums are locked in at a low rate , and you are guaranteed coverage at that rateregardless of what health issues you may develop . I hope that helps , feel free to contact me with any questions or concerns that you may have , okay ? Thanks for asking !
There are changes that must take place when you move with an in force auto policy , yes . If you are just moving within the same state , you need to inform your insurance professional of your new address . Every insurance provider has many dfferent rating territories within each state so it is possible that you will see a premium change as a result of your move . If you are moving to a different state , work with your incurance professional who may be able to locate another quality agent who represents your insurance company . They will be able to help you with the transfer of your policy and the process is very simple . If your company does not offer coverage in your new state , maintain the policy you have until youobtain new coverage , then inform your previous insurance professional and they will cancel the coverage and arrange for any refund to be sent to you at your new address .
You should get a renters insurance policy before you occupy a unit that requires that you carry renters insurance . You should get a policy before you put your personal property into a unit because the landlord is not responsible for your property , even if his unit burns to the ground , with your property inside . You should get a policy before you move into a new unit in case someone helping you move is injured and it results in a lawsuit . The landlord doesnt have any responsibility for that either .
Great Qutestion . Generally personal car insurance does not cover a moving truck . Since a moving truck is consider a commercial vehicle . You can buy insurance from the moving company that rents you the truck . And always check with your current insurance compay for rules and regulation on that particular question .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does My Home Insurance Cover My TV ?
Your standard HO3 Homeowner policy will provide coverage for personal property/contents such as your standard household tv unless you have specifically excluded contents coverage all together . Be careful to review your personal property/contents limit on your individual policy as the amount may vary from one year/one policy to the next . You may wish to refer to your specific policy for any additional endorsements or exclusions that may apply .
There are two methods of calculating the value of loss items in insurance : Replacement Cost Value -LRB- or RCV -RRB- , and Actual Cash Value -LRB- or ACV -RRB- . Depreciation is used to calculate ACV . With RCV , you are only concerned with the replacement cost of the loss items . For example , ifI purchased a 32 inch flat screen TV 5 years ago , I might have paid $ 900 for the TV . But tobuy that exact same TV now might only cost $ 200 . So , I would get RPV of $ 200 , because that is the cost to replace my loss item . -LRB- This could also work the other way . If that exact same TV now is $ 1,200 , I would get that amount instead -RRB- . With ACV , we use depreciation to determine the actual cash value of the loss item . So with my $ 900 TV that I bought 5 years ago , each year that I 've owned the item its ` valuewill be less . Eventually , my TV will only beworth the amount I could get to scrap it . After 5 years , that TV is only worth $ 50 , because the actual value of that TV has depreciated .
I 'm going to assume that you want it for the unthinkable ... Death ... not college . The TV & Radio talkers often say , `` OH ... you do n't need to have more than what you need for final expenses . '' I 'm a dad ... If one of my kids passes ... I WO N'T FUNCTION FOR 2-3 MONTHS ... I DO NOT want to profit off my kids ... . Yet not getting out of bed for months , flying my family across the country , etc. . . Look ... I 'm saying this as a DAD who happens to be in the insurance biz ... Love your kids ... Buy what you can afford and fits the underwritting guidlelines of the carrier ... .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
There is really only 1 renters policy . However , the coverage included can vary . Some policies are written on an Actual Cash Value basis , where other policies are written on a Full Content Replacement basis . Let me explain the difference . Let 's say you went out and bought a brand new TV that cost you $ 1000 today . Three years from now , it gets damaged and you submit a claim under your Renters policy . On the Actual Cash Value policy , the claim adjuster would look up the make and model of your TV , and find that it is no longer selling for $ 1000 . That model now sells for $ 400 . But the $ 400 would be for a brand now unit out of the box , where your TV was 3 years old , so they further reduce the claim based on depreciation . You 're left with $ 250 - and you still need to pay your $ 100 deductible . Not a good day . With Full Contents Replacement coverage , the claims adjuster looks at how much you spent on the TV , not the make and model , and your claim is processed for $ 1000 -LRB- minus your $ 100 deductible -RRB- . And since technology has improved over the past three years , you now have the choice to purchase the same TV you had -LRB- which is selling for only $ 400 now remember ? -RRB- or purchase a better TV with better features than the one that was damaged . Not a bad day at all ! Although the Actual Cash Value policy will cost less , you wind up getting less in the end . Remember , just because one policy is cheaper than another , does n't mean it 's a better deal . Always consult with a licensed , professional insurance agent to help determine which policy is best for your needs .
A broken TV Screen would be covered by home owner insurance only in the event of a covered loss such as burglary , fire , hail , or wind . Otherwise , the broken tv screen is not a covered repair to be filed on a homeowner 's policy . Most home owner policies have at least a $ 500 deductible . therefore , in the event it is covered , you may want to find out the cost of the repair before making a claim on your insurance .
This information is based on knowledge on the most basic level : Yes you do . Typically in insurance , if you do n't own something , you ca n't insure it . So for example if each of you have a TV in their bedrooms , and a fire destroys the TVs , one person 's insurance may not claim all 3 TVs because he did not own all 3 TVs . You may typically only insure what you own based on Michigan insurance guidelines .
Let me add a few comments here on how the coverages are usually presented on a Declaration page of a Homeowners policy . First there is the party being insured and who the company is that is providing the insurance . Then there is a specific term for the coverage to begin and end . Then there are many ways to then itemize the coverage , but here are some basics . The policy is usually divided into two Sections . Section I deals with property insurance and Section II Liability Insurance , so within the section I coverages there are usually four parts Coverages A , B , C , D. Coverage A is the Dwelling Coverage . This can be sold on an Actual cash value basis -LRB- very infrequently , but watch out for it -RRB- usually on a 100 % of the dollar value of the estimated cost to replace the house itself . This is often difficult for consumers to understand , but no one really cares about the market value . What is important is the replacement cost and replacing one house destroyed is usually a lot more expensive then building one new in a subdivision . Make sure you have enough coverage . This is not an exact science so many companies offer extensions to increase the coverage beyond the stated value . Next is Coverage B : These are the other structures appurtenant , outbuildings , fences , Gazebos unattached garages etc. . Coverage C is usually Personal Property or Contents Coverage . This is very important to understand : You want replacement cost coverage not Actual Cash Value , ACV . The easiest way to think of this is the ten your old large and 200 lb TV . The ACV is going to be next to nothing . There is no continuing interest in buying that type TV anywhere . But replacing it with a new TV with light weight plasma features is what you want . Coverage D is Additional Living Expense . This can be stated two different ways or a mixture of the two . Some companies list a maximum dollar limit available . Others list a maximum time limit and still others list a maximum time limit and dollar limit . This covers the additional cost of living elsewhere while your home is reconstructed . It can also come into play if a Governmental authority wo n't let you near your home for safety reasons -LRB- i.e. forced evacuation form an impending hurricane -RRB- . This coverage does not pick up the cost of things you would normally pay out of pocket , but the additional things and costs necessary to keep your household going while your home is repaired . The next set of coverages comprise Section II or liability coverage . Coverage E is very broad and covers such things as an injury to a child by your dog , or an inadvertent collapse of you deck with guests on it etc. . Coverage E then is is sold in increments of 100,000 usually . The difference in price from say 300,000 to 500,000 is usually only a few dollars a year . If you have an umbrella policy , you may be required to carry a minimum of 500,000 in coverage . Coverage F is Medical payments coverage . This is usually quite nominal and is used to cover minor incidents where fault may not be much of an issue , but you feel obliged to pay for the medical bill . For example a neighbor picks up your mail for you while you are gone and trips on your garden hose . The injuries are not serious , but do require a couple stitches . The limit is low because the much more serious incidents would require negligence or absolute liability and would fall under Coverage E. I hope this helps . If you are in AZ.CA , TX , MO , or GA we 'll be glad to assist you with placing your homeowners coverage .
That is a great question ! I 'm personally glad that you asked , as I think this is an area where a lot of people get misled , and too often with tragic results . A normal term policy will have a very defined time period that covers you . It is typically between 5-20 years . Where the trouble lies is in some of the ones that are direct mailed to you , or are marketed on TV . Often those term life policies are marketed to Senior Citizens , and can be misleading . They will tell you in small print , or in passing -LRB- my ` favorite ' is the tv one where they flash a big red $ 19.95 a month on the screen as the announcer says `` term to age 80 '' - in most cases , you focus on the money , and miss the age limit -RRB- that these policies end when you turn 80 . The average life expectancy is 82 . What happens when you live to be 80 and a day ? Coverage is now impossible to afford , let alone get , and there is no cash or coverage from the expired term policy . Please contact an agent or advisor who is knowledgeable about insurance before buying anything , ok ? Thanks for asking !
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Renters Insurance is not designed to cover damage to property such as real estate . It will cover your property inside the apartment or home you are renting . Be sure to look at the type of coverage you are getting as well ; current value v. replacement value . In other words , if your TV is damaged , would you want what it is currently valued at or what it takes to get a new TV ?
Home insurance does not cover a broken TV , a broken radio or any broken appliance . Wear and tear and product defect are simply not perils that insurers pay for for home policies . Fire , theft , vandalism and many other items would be covered . An experienced broker can review the best prices in your area so you pay less and cover more .
How did it break ? If it is just old -LRB- or even new for that matter -RRB- and the thing simply quite working ... NO . did a tornado rip your roof off and wind blow the TV off the stand and destroy it - probably . Did a theif drop it on their way out - maybe . Lightning strike your house and fry the TV - call your agent . I 'm joking around , but most all homeowners policies to not extend coverage to TV , appliances , etc. that simply break . There must be a covered claim situation that caused the damage for your policy to come into play . Call your local indpendent agent and dsicuss your specific situation to find out how your policy might handle things .
Renters insurance should be enough to cover all of the contents that you own in a rental property . If you are renting a small studio versus an entire house , the amounts should be very different . A rule of thumb that has been taught to me was to use $ 10,000 per room rented . Also , check with your insurance company to find out what the minimum coverage is to have replacement cost . Without replacement cost , you will only receive depreciated value in the event of a loss . So that new TV you bought three years ago will be worth much less today . You would rather have the replacement of a new TV for an older TV . You should also include some sort of liability coverage when purchasing your renters coverage .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
Talk to your Insurance Professional , but in my experience , yes , you would each need to obtain your own policies . Though you all will be living together and no doubt sharing some of each other 's things , none of you have any `` insurable interest '' in each other 's personal property . The above examople of a loss to three separately owned TV 's is a very good example . Likewise , if one of your room mate 's negligence causes property damage or injury to another person , the fact that you happen to share an apartment does not necessarily hold you and your other room mate legally liable for the action of your buddy . That person 's policy and insurance company claims professional then would be handling the claim , not yours .
Great question ! Most folks know the importance of homeowners insurance , but few people realize all of the benefits and coverage available with a renter 's insurance policy . Coverage options differ between insurance companies , but here is a quick list of items that are typically covered : 1 . It covers replacing all of your belongings , including furniture , clothes , shoes , tools , laptops , and TVs after a covered loss . -LRB- Many people incorrectly assume that if they are renting , their personal belongings are covered under the property owner 's insurance policy ; in most cases the renter 's belongings are not covered under the owner 's policy . -RRB- 2 . It covers medical costs for guests who may be injured in your home . -LRB- Perhaps the neighbor sprained their ankle falling off of your step ? Wouldnt it be nice to cover their medical expenses as a courtesy , and not have to pay out of your own pocket ? -RRB- 3 . It gives you liability protection for events you may be held liable for on or off the property . -LRB- Maybe the neighbor who sprained their ankle decides to sue you ? -RRB- 4 . It covers additional living expenses , such as a hotel room , and dining out in the event you are temporarily evacuated from your home . -LRB- Perhaps a pipe bursts , and the landlord says you have to stay somewhere else for 10 days while they conduct repairs ? -RRB-
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Why Is It A Good Idea To Have Renters Insurance ?
Renters insurance provides protection for your belongings should you have something terrible happen , such as a fire , water damage , or a break in . The insurance will help provide the money to replace the value of what was lost . Without it , the cost of replacing your tv , computer , etc. is all yours .
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
Yes , a landlord can require a tenant to purchase renters insurance . Landlords are responsible for insurance that covers the dwelling , but renters are responsible for their belongings.Renters can also be held liable for any injuries that happen in the dwelling , which would be covered by the renters insurance . Since renters insurance is so inexpensive , it 's always a good idea to have renters insurance , rather than risk losing everything .
Unless you have a basic fire policy , most renters policies will cover theft . That is why it is a good idea to keep receipts for any large purchases , take pictures and keep an inventory . Keep copies of these in an off premise location such as a relatives home or safety deposit box . It will help if the insurance company questions a claim . Fraudulent theft claims cost insurance companies millions of dollars per year and many are cracking down . By keeping a good inventory , pictures , and receipts you protect yourself .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com today , and here 's our question : is converting my term life insurance policy to a permanent policy a good idea ? Well remember , most people buy their term insurance because they 're buying it for a time certain event 10 years , 15 years , 20 years . Sometimes life changes and all of the sudden liabilities and obligations that I thought were going to be terminal now become permanent . I want to make sure when I buy my term insurance contract that I have convertibility and that that convertibility allows me to go to a really good permanent portfolio , so all of the sudden if I need to change and I need to make a maneuver , I may have to convert my term to perm because my obligations and liabilities have changed . That 's why you need to look at a good term contract that has convertibility options and a good window to convert to a good quality permanent policy . Well , that 's our consumer quest ion for today . If you have any questions just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
-- > Normal 0 In the spirit of every reasonable insurance question is deserving of an answer , I submit . Tenant Homeowner or Renters policies cover damage to your personal property and food certainly would be considered Personal Property . As long as the power outage was caused by one of the named perils in your policy -LRB- fire , lightning , wind , vehicle damage , etc. -RRB- and it occurred on your premises , you may have a valid claim for food spoiled as a result of a power outage . But if the power outage was caused by something that occurred away from your residence , most Renters policies specifically exclude that type of loss unless the power outage then causes covered damage to your residence . Remember however , most Renters policies have a deductible of $ 250 or more so make sure you take that into consideration . Add to that the effect submitting a small claim , one less than $ 1000 , could have on your future premium or the willingness of your insurance company to renew your coverage . It may be a good idea to pass on submitting this type of claim even though you may have some coverage . In addition , most policies require you to take reasonable steps to preserve your property following a loss . Make sure you have done what you can to prevent your food from spoiling following a power outage . Some policies include a number of additional coverages , often an effort to make one companys policy appear more attractive than another . These additional coverages provide nominal amounts of insurance covering specific loss situations such as key replacement or food spoilage . Here again , you may be tempted to submit a claim because you have coverage but consider the impact a claim might have on future premiums and renewal terms . You may be better served to simply replace the food . When an event like this occurs , try to recall why you purchased insurance in the first place . More than likely , it wasnt to reimburse you if the food in your refrigerator went bad .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
It is a good idea to talk to your Insurance Professional in order to completely understand the terms and conditions of your policy . That having been said , in most standard renters insurance policies , vandalism is included among the covered perils for which you would have protection . Should you ever have to file a claim with your insurance company for this , it would be a good idea to first report the loss to the police and obtain an incident report as your Claims Professional will need to see this .
The only time renters insurance is actually required is if the landlord makes it a condition of the rental agreement . Landlords may do this in order to protect themselves from a potential law suit brought on by the tenants negligence . Other then that a renter is free to chose whether they wish to purchase renters insurance to protect their belonging , loss of use and liability or self insure and assume all the risk themselves by not having renters insurance . Renters insurance is so remarkably inexpensive for the protection you get I do not see why anyone would not obtain renters insurance .
The Cheapest Stand Alone Renters Insurance is available through Stillwater Insurance Group . In order to obtain the lowest quote for renters insurance , you must select the minimum property coverage required , the minimum liability coverage needed and the maximum available deductible ; this would provide the cheapest quote for Renters Insurance . There is a link available in multiple States in order to obtain a quick quote and purchase your renters insurance online . WEBSITELINK If the insurance has been required by a Landlord , it may be a good idea to find out if the Landlord needs to be listed as an Additional Insured on the policy ; in which case , the Landlord must provide the name , address and applicable account number -LRB- if any -RRB- to be listed by the insurance carrier on the policy .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
That is a great question ! There are two reasons why tenants would want renters insurance . The first benefits the landlord , and that is why they want you to have it - it lowers their insurance bill , which hopefully translates into lower rent for you . The second is that it protects you , in the event that a neighbor -LRB- or you -RRB- accidentally damages your apartment , and the things thatyou own . Unless you have a bundle of cash to replace and repair everything , your renters policy is a good thing to have . Thanks for asking !
When you rent a property , you can buy renters insurance . These policies protect you in two different ways . First , if the belongings in your rental property get stolen or destroyed , the rental insurance will replace them . Second , if someone gets hurt in your rental home and sues you , the rental insurance will protect you . By offering both these areas of coverage , a renters insurance policy is worth its cost . Whether an insurance policy is worth buying depends on the size of the risk it is covering . You want to insure assets that you couldnt afford to replace on your own . This is why you would buy insurance on your house but not on a $ 20 pair of pants . If renters insurance just covered your belongings , it would be a close call . Renters insurance is fairly inexpensive but replacing your personal property is a fairly low cost . While its nice to have all your belongings protected , this is the type of risk you can insure yourself with your own savings . The potentially greater value of rental insurance is its liability coverage . If someone sues you and wins a judgement , you can potentially lose everything you own . By making a small investment in renters insurance , you protect yourself against the rare but catastrophic risk . When you consider both sides of renters insurance , this coverage makes sense . By making this small investment , you make sure that your rented home wont ruin you financially .
To get a life insurance policy on someone else , it is a good idea to start out discussing it with them . Get their exact date of birth , height , weight , whether they have used any tobacco in the past three years , and any medications they are taking . Ask about whether they have any health conditions now or in the past . Nothing is more frustrating that being declined for life insurance when it was not your idea to get it in the first place . Involving that person , explaining why you are getting it , discussing who will pay for it , and asking whether they care if they take an exam , are all ways to help the policy be placed smoothly and without hard feelings .
Non-renewals are more common that cancels in my opinion . The difference is that basically they will keep the policy until the renewal , then not continue coverage beyond that . If you have been non-renewed , it is a good idea to start talking to insurance agents right away , as , depending on why you are being non-renewed -LRB- they should give you a reason -RRB- it may take some time to find an insurance company that is willing to accept you . Make sure to tell the agents you are talking to that you have been non-renewed by your current insurance and why . It is important info so that they can get you accurate quotes .
The majority of landlords require their tenants to have renters insurance with a lease provision . No state law requires renters insurance , aside from a few local laws pertaining to people with certain breeds of dogs who must maintain liability insurance . But it 's certainly a good idea to have , because one break-in or fire would devastate you . Renters insurance replaces your property in a matter of days , as opposed to the years you 'd have to work to replace one thing at a time as you can afford it .
Renters insurance is not mandatory , however it 's a good idea to have and affordable . Your landlord policy only covers the structure and not your personal items . It may even help reduce your auto policy by having renters insurance . Renters insurance policies cover medical bills for someone hurt when they visit you , it covers liability claims in case someone is injured on your rented property as well . It also covers your personal items in case of fire or a complete loss . Allen Beach
That is an excellent question ! The first thing that I would tell you is to find a good agent to help you with this . You will want to have a good idea of the value of your belongings , and decide whether it is better for you to pay more , and get replacement value -LRB- paid for new -RRB- or pay less , and get actual value -LRB- paid , but minus age and depreciation values -RRB- . You will also want to have an idea of whether you have a collection , or items that might need to be specially insured . Again , a good agent can help you with those decisions . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
end question
