start question
disability-insurance
Is There A Minimum Percentage Of Premiums That Disability Carriers Have To Pay Out For Claims ?
Yes , across the country most , if not all , departments of insurance regulators require a minimum percentage of the premiums to be paid back to the policy holders . Depending on the state , the average requirement is between 60 % and 65 % . Generally , what you will see is the actual claims results increasing this percentage during periods of recession as many policy holders are inclined to go out on claim as a result of diminishing employment opportunities .
Could be . Since I am not a certified accountant , I can not give tax advice but here are the parameters for possible tax-advantaged treatment to discuss with a tax professional : 1 . Every year the IRS publishes the formula of percentage of premium by age that can be used for favorable tax treatment on the 1040 tax return . This formula is updated on various tax preparation software programs every year and certainly qualified tax advisors know what it is . It is also public information that can be obtained at various websites .2 . If the premium causes one to exceed the minimum percentage of health care costs on Schedule A , that amount above the minimum percentage could be deductible .3 . If one is a business owner , the above mention formula may be used on Schedule C to determine the deduction allowable as an amount paid for health insurance premiums .4 . C-corps may be able to ignore the IRS formula and deduct 100 % of the long-term care insurance premium on Schedule C.There may be other situations in which the payment of LTCi premium is treated in a tax-favorable manner . This is a topic for discussion with a qualified tax advisor before a consumer should make any assumptions about the tax treatment of the payment of long-term care insurance premiums .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Yes , across the country most , if not all , departments of insurance regulators require a minimum percentage of the premiums to be paid back to the policy holders . Depending on the state , the average requirement is between 60 % and 65 % . Generally , what you will see is the actual claims results increasing this percentage during periods of recession as many policy holders are inclined to go out on claim as a result of diminishing employment opportunities .
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
Coinsurance is a funny sounding word that makes sense once you understand it . With most policies , coinsurance follows satisfaction of your major medical deductible . After the deductible , you pay a percentage of the approved claim and the carrier pays another percentage . In most situations the carrier pays 80 % while you pay 20 % . Coinsurance . You insure -LRB- or pay -RRB- and the carrier co-insures the claim .
Disability insurance replaces a percentage of your gross monthly income , often in the 60 % to 75 % range . In some cases , with very high incomes , the percentage is lower , like 40 % to 50 % . Personally owned and personally paid disability insurance is usually a tax free benefit at time of claim ; this is one reason for the reduced percentage . Another reason is that the insurance company must maintain an incentive for people to return to work ; you should always make more money working than collecting disability insurance benefits .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Disability insurance is one of the most under sold insurance products in the market . The fact is an average person is 8 times more likely to become disabled than to die . It can have an expensive premium depending on your underwriting class , but at claim time you will be glad you purchased it . Most people depend on the US government for their disability benefits known as SSI through their Social Security . This process takes a minimum of 9 months to complete and most folks are in dire straits financially before receiving their benefits . I would suggest at a minimum purchasing a short term disability plan . This plan will have a shorter elimination time and pay benefits faster in case of an illness or injury so severe you can no longer work . A good long term disability will coordinate with your SSI to pay benefits as far out as 67 years old and up to 70 % of your income . Also buyer beware of cheaper accident only disability plans . Statistically 90 % of all worker related long term disability claims are illness related not injury related
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
Homeowners Insurance is a contract whereby a homeowner transfers his/her risk to an insurance carrier in return for a contract and a small premium . Homeowners Insurance Premium will usually increase from year to year ; however , by chance a decrease may be seen once in a while . Insurance companies increase the Dwelling Coverage each year to keep up with the increasing cost of reconstruction ; after all , homeowners insurance 's primary purpose is to rebuild a home in the unfortunate event of a total loss . The small increase of dwelling coverage each year is usually the purpose that draws attention when the premium rises ; however , this is very insignificant . Insurance companies are audited each year and are obligated to comply with State Department of Insurance regulations in each and every State where they underwrite risk . Each year , insurance carriers calculate the necessary premium to maintain a safe financial condition and offer security to all homes insured ; the largest reason for premium increase would be ` loss experience ' during the prior year , another reason may be due to increased operational cost including but definitely not limited to reinsurance premium paid . Insurance Companies either have an internal actuarial department or hire an independent actuarial firm who are charged with the responsibility of calculating premium based on underwriting factors and prior loss data . For this reason , carriers only offer annual policies and are unable to predict risk on a longer term basis . Since carriers experience different loss results each and every year , insurance rates and increase percentages are never the same from one year to the next . Since paid losses continue to grow , claim frequency is showing growth and litigation is becoming more commonplace , insurance companies raise premium to keep up with the outflow of payments . It is important to recognize that claims and operational expenses are paid from the pool of collected policy premium . For a more detailed explanation or financial report from your current carrier , contact your carrier representative to receive a report . Also , data is available as published by the Department of Insurance in most States .
The long and short is answer is yes and no . If it were only that easy . There are several factors that play into premium increases due to claims . The first is the insurance company policies and underwriting . Also , what type of business are you in . Followed by the two biggest factors in premium changes due to claims , which are frequency and severity . The frequency is the number of claims that you have and how often they occur . Also are your claims predictable or are they unforeseen . Severity refers to the size or dollar amount of the claim . All of these factors and more will go into the decision to change your premium . If it is a claim that can happen again and there are no risk management procedures in place at your business , that is not in your favor . If you have a rather large claim that exceeds your premium that is also not in your favor . If you shop insurance companies every year and have no loyalty to the carrier , that is not in you r favor . If you are late paying your premium or have minimum coverage limits that can also be viewed negatively . Conversely , if you do the opposite of the above mentioned , then a single claim maybe considered a rare occurrence and not worthy of effecting your premium the following year . The best thing to do is get with your agent and discuss all the facets of the claim and what best course of action to take .
It 's 2016 . Let me add to this with an updated reply : We work with about 12 carriers that offer Critical Illness . There only tends to be two `` not covered areas '' with some policies . # 1 . Certain types of Skin cancer are not covered . Skin cancer means melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer . Understand if and at what level skin cancers are covered . Melanoma of the skin , the deadliest form of skin cancer , is the fifth most common type of new cancer diagnosis in American men and the seventh most common type in American women . SO make sure skin cancer is covered . # 2 Know the difference between Invasive Cancer & Carcinoma in Situ -LRB- Non-Invasive Cancer -RRB- . All policies pay a reduced amount for in Situ . Carcinoma in Situ is the earliest form of cancer which involves only the tissue where it is found and has not invaded the surrounding tissue or organs in the body . So when the cancer is smaller and localized , it 's not nearly as `` threatening '' . The benefit amount for in Situ is a percentage of the full amount . So if you bought a $ 10,000 critical illness policy , a typical plan pays 25 % of the benefit amount for in Situ . Or in this example , $ 2500 . The good news is that the other $ 7500 is still there for you to access should the cancer spread . KNOW the percentage that is paid out . I still believe some carriers only pay out at 10 % for in Situ ... I suggest a carrier that is at 25 % . So this is n't a `` not covered issue '' . Invasive vs. in Situ is just know at what level your benefit pays out . Something else ... we lean towards plans that trigger a benefit upon diagnosis , not treatment of , the critical illness . Consider the organ transplant coverage . You need the $ $ way before the actual transplant . It can take months before you are 1st in line for an organ . As with all my other posts , we let underwriting determine the best choice for someone and then the coverage for the premium paid . BYE THE BEST you can qualify for folks ... . Reach out and I can work on getting you a copy of `` Stop Wasting Your Money on Insurance '' . - gravy
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
In general , if your primary care physician deems a gastric bypass as a medically necessary procedure , your health insurance plan should cover a percentage of the expenses - the exact percentage of the bill that the carrier will pay for is going to vary from plan to plan and carrier to carrier . Contact an insurance agent to review available health plans from multiple carriers in your zip code .
There are several benefit triggers for disability insurance that may impact the level of benefit you can purchase . Most carriers will limit the monthly benefit to a percentage of your monthly gross income . The percentage ranges from 50 % to 70 % . There will also be a hard dollar cap that may apply to people with higher incomes . The policy elimination period comes into play most frequently , as most disabilities have a very short duration . Shorter elimination periods often result in more frequent , and larger claims payments .
Yes . Many individuals will set up a short term disability policy as well as a long-term disability policy to cover different types of scenarios -LRB- e.g. if you become permanently disabled vs. being temporarily disabled -RRB- . Some individuals will have a group DI policy through an employer and supplement it with an individual DI policy if they feel the group DI does n't provide enough benefits or a very good `` definition of disability '' -LRB- the most important factor with DI coverage -RRB- - when buying disability insurance , make sure of -LRB- and understand -RRB- the definition of disability that 's being cited in the program -LRB- own occupation , modified , or gainful - this is the most important factor in your disability policy as it will determine if you are eligible for a claim when something happens -RRB- . Please note , disability insurance policies coordinate benefits so there 's a limit to how much coverage and what kind you can secure -LRB- most carriers will keep it to a maximum of 70 % of income - the percentage can vary by insurance company -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help setting up coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
It is usually anywhere between $ 20/month to $ 100/month based on the coverage that you need for your household . Most people choose a minimum of $ 25,000 for their personal property . All of the other coverage is usually a percentage of the personal property amount . Hope this helps you out in your decision making .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will My Home Insurance Go Up If I Make A Claim ?
It is possible that you will see an increase in your Homeowners ' premium at renewal if you make a claim . That is tending to be the common practice among Home Insurance providers , generally speaking . While some claims can not be avoided - those resulting from severe storms for example , you can reduce the possibility of a claim by properly maintaining your home and property . Trim over hanging tree branches and shrubbery around your home . These simple examples can reduce the risk of a tree falling on your roof or someone using your landscaping to hide a break in .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
When this question is asked I am not sure if you mean the best insurance company with coverage 's and claims or the who has the best rates . Let 's address rates first : There is no company who has the best rates as there are many varying factors that can make one insurance company rise to the top over another as it pertains to premium . In other words who has the best rate for me may not be the best for you , and we could live right next door to each other . Now lets move on to the more important issue and that is coverage 's : What you have to understand is most insurance companies have varying options/packages of coverage 's available to purchase . In most cases agents tend to offer the cheapest package which does not maximize coverage 's that are potentially available to the client . I suggest when shopping for insurance that you truly consult with your agent about the different options available by an insurance company so you can make an educated decision on the coverage you wish to purchase and how much of the risk you yourself wish to assume . As an independent agent I am able to offer quotes and coverage 's from multiple companies to help my clients make the most informed decision about their most important asset , and that is their home . Now the next subject would be claims : Which insurance company continues to rise to the top in claims handling . There are many independent websites which you do a quick search on and find ratings on how well claims are handled and their overall customer satisfaction and loyalty . There are many companies that are great in the claims area that I bet you have never even heard of . You will also find negatives on every insurance company out there without exception . Most of the negatives are due to coverage 's not being in place that the client thought they had . Or in other words . A lack of understanding their policy . This goes back to my suggestion on being educated on the coverage 's available to you . There are many independent online reviews available to you -LRB- some good , some not so good -RRB- that will give you ratings on how well the claims experience is for clients and how insurance companies rank in the claims department . But there is one thing that I believe is very critical to the claims process and that is your agent . An absentee agent can make the process very frustrating if you are having some communication difficulty with the insurance company . An agent that is actually working for you can help make any unfortunate claims experience must less painful then it needs to be . So never take the agent out of the equation when shopping for homeowners insurance . So with all that being said , my parting advice is do your research , consult and ask lots of questions from your agent . Do n't be shy are think it 's a dumb question because it 's not . After all , were talking about your home .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
I actually just did this for a client . I had sold a gentleman a policy a number of years ago . He unfortunately got sick , and eventually passed . His wife called me up and wanted to know what to do . I called the carrier on her behalf and initiated the claim . The first thing the claims representative did was stop the automatic drafts of the premium from their checking account . That is a good move . Even amidst their grief , spouses in mourning still dont want to waste any money . They want the benefit . Towards that end , the claims rep then mailed the widow her claims kit . She , as the beneficiary , must file the claim . If for some reason she had been in capable of doing so , then a custodian or other appointed person would do it on her behalf . It took about a week , and she did get the kit . It was pretty simple . Obviously , a copy of the death certificate would have to be filed with the paperwork . Funeral homes are typically on top of this . They often encourage the grieving survivors to purchase a number of copies . They know that all sorts of institutions require it when settling that the estate of the deceased . I have found my involvement in expediting life insurance claims for clients to be some of the most powerful emotional experiences of my life . One in particular stands out . I had sold policies to a young couple . A number of years afterward , she became tragically distraught and overwhelmed . She committed suicide . These folks were my friends , and this made it double-hard to get involved . Her husband was so upset he couldnt even complete the claim form . I had to do so for him and just prepare it for his signature . Whew . I could tell you more stories like this . But such is the life of a life insurance salesman . Brokers do not have to be the ones to expedite the claims . Any friend or family member could do it . They can order the paperwork , and holds the beneficiarys hand during the process . But the beneficiary has to be the one to file the claim . Nobody likes to go through this . But , that is why you buy the policy . Want to keep learning ? Check out my blog : Planrisklive.com
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I live in Georgia also and have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
-- > Normal 0 I can suggest of a number of reasons . First , if I own a car and while it is being used it hurts someone or damages their property , I feel one has a moral obligation to reimburse them for their injuries or damage . Moral obligations would seem to be one of the cornerstones of any society . Since most people dont have a pile of cash hanging around to reimburse people who they hurt , auto insurance is a convenient efficient mechanism that helps people do that . For a relatively small amount of money , an insurance company will agree to reimburse someone should my car injure them . Depending on my moral compass , that limit could be anywhere from a few thousand to several hundred thousand dollars . Of course , I also might realize when driving my car someone could hurt me or passengers in my car . So , I might like to have the same kind of agreement with the insurance company , pay me if someone hurts me and doesnt have any insurance or not enough to make me whole again . Then of course , if I run into someone or something with my car and damage it , it would be nice not to have to come up with a large sum of money to fix or replace it . So it makes sense to include that in the deal I make with the insurance company . Most states have enacted laws , which say if you want to drive your car on our highways , you have to agree to be responsible for any damage you cause . To back up that promise , you have to prove you are financially able to do that . You can either put up a substantial sum of money in the form of a bond or an insurance company will do that for you for a price . In a nutshell , these are the basic reasons to consider buying insurance . And if you want to consider the alternatives , walking , driving a car only around your own yard or coming up with a large sum of cash , I think you will find insurance a very attractive alternative .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one company that is `` best '' or `` average '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I live in Georgia also and have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Like all other types of insurance , there is no one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' home owners coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . That is the only way to ensure you receive honest , expert advice , based on your personal needs . With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing coverage for more than one item . For example , I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
Homeowners insurance is not always cheaper than car insurance . Insurance prices are based on the amount of risk an insurance company is taking , which is the reason costs vary so dramatically . Like all other types of insurance , there is no one single price for home owners insurance , nor is there one company that is `` best '' or `` most affordable '' coverage for everyone . To determine the best plan for your personal situation , I suggest speaking with a licensed insurance agent , one who represents many companies in your area . It is also important to note that the cost of your auto insurance can vary dramatically based on a number of factors , including where you live , what kind of car you drive , your personal driving record , and what type of coverage you want -LRB- minimum coverage to be legal to drive cost much less than a more comprehensive policy that provides far more coverage -RRB- . Likewise , the cost of your homeowners insurance can vary depending on the value of your home.With property and casualty coverage such as home owners or auto insurance , you can normally get a better deal when purchasing these two types of coverage from the same company . I have my car and my home both covered on policies with Auto-Owners Insurance company . With the multi-policy discounts I receive , I actually pay less to insure my home and car than I would pay to insure my home , if that was the only policy I carried with that company . While that may sound illogical , if not unbelievable , it is true , and is a very smart approach to take to make sure you keep as much as your hard earned money in your pocket as possible .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is A Taft-Hartley Retirement Plan ?
Taft-Hartley retirement plans are retirement plans for union members and their families . Benefits and contributions are negotiated as part of the CBA . Management and oversight of a T-H plan is usually handled by a third party administrator that is contracted by the union . Some large plans -LRB- such as the Teamsters -RRB- represent more than one union group .
Taft-Hartley retirement plans are retirement plans for union members and their families . Benefits and contributions are negotiated as part of the CBA . Management and oversight of a T-H plan is usually handled by a third party administrator that is contracted by the union . Some large plans -LRB- such as the Teamsters -RRB- represent more than one union group .
It is possible . Check your plan document if you are unsure . ERISA plans are typically self funded single employer plans but can also include MET or MEWA plans and Taft-Hartley plans . ERISA plans are not subject to state laws and mandates and are not covered under state guaranty funds . ERISA plans are governed by the DOL and IRS .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Many consider an arbitrary age , such as 65 , as the time when they must retire . The better question is , when will I be ready to retire ? Planning towards that date makes better sense . Almost 40 % report that they started retirement at a date that they did not choose . This makes early planning very important . There is quantitative data that will be necessary to start this process . You should prepare a current financial statement so that you can identify your assets and your liabilities . A cash flow statement would show both your current income and spending habits . That would give you a good indication about your spending in retirement . It would also help you decide if your retirement objectives are realistic . You might be living on a modest income , but planning to retire in luxury . That might be difficult to accomplish . When you are looking at debt you need to identify those debts that will remain into your retirement . On the asset side you need to determine how much of those assets will be available once you retire . You probably have some assets that you dont think about such as cash value life insurance , the equity in your home , another home , or collections . Armed with this information you should seek professional help . If you are uncomfortable with that a visit to the local library will probably locate books that can help you evaluate things for yourself . If you do talk to a professional expect questions about your family , hobbies , organizations and other things that interest you . The next step , taken either alone or with a professional , is to identify and prioritize your retirement goals . It is often difficult to visualize what life will be like once you retire . You should , however , identify what activities you want to do when you retire . If you want to do wood working or golf or travel , these things have costs and need to be identified . Some activities that you enjoy today might be difficult when you retire . Many people want to leave a legacy . If you can establish now what you want to leave to charity or to your family that would be most helpful . If these can be funded early in the process it frees you to make decisions about your spending without worrying about conserving capital for a legacy . The three most pressing issues for most people are providing for a retirement that lasts longer than they anticipate , providing for their surviving spouse and the potential expense of long-term care . These concerns play an important role in your retirement plan and may even affect the date that you start retirement . Your cash flow statement should show what you are spending now . Those expenses will change somewhat and it is important to make those adjustments . Identify which expenses are absolutely necessary and which are discretionary . The way that you provide for basic expenses will be different from the way that you provide for your discretionary expenses . Remember that expenses are not going to remain constant over retirement . Inflation is a problem in retirement that results in increased expenses when the income is probably remaining the same . At the same time , with age comes reduced capability to engage in some activities and that might lower the cost of retirement . The next step is to identify the sources of retirement income . For most there will be social security . For a surprising number social security provides most or all of their retirement income . Perhaps you are fortunate and have a pension plan . Perhaps you have saved money for retirement in qualified or non-qualified plans . Armed with this information you can start to formulate a plan that will take you through retirement and help you meet your objectives .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
In order to determine what is the best retirement plan , you first need to clarify what you are trying to accomplish . What does a successful retirement look like for you ? Once you have an idea what that means then you will be able to calculate what it will cost to fund it . The would will be able to determine what is best for you . Additional information on retirement planning is available on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
A retirement plan really is an extension of a financial plan.There are two parts . Your financial planner may be qualified to help you with both as a retirement planner or work with a lifestyle planner . The first step is determining what you want to do when you retire . How do you define retirement success ? Deciding when you will slow down and what you will do with your time - your lifestyle can be a challenge . Once you have an idea what retirement success looks like for you then your financial planner can determine what it will cost to make what you want to happen happen . The next step is to design a plan to make it happen . Then take action and follow up . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
The life expectancy for sixty-five year old men and women has increased by more than ten percent since 2000 . This finding has implications for everyone preparing for retirement . The obvious issue is that if you are already receiving a private pension now that the trustees of that pension are going to be under increased pressure . Returns on investments are quite low and now the time that payments will be required has increased substantially . If you are looking forward to retiring in the near future on a defined benefit pension plan the trustees will be doing what they can to reduce their liability . While this increase in life expectancy will affect private retirement plans , public pension plans and multi-company pension plans might be even more vulnerable . Some of these plans are not subject to the same sort of regulations and are even now facing a shortfall in funding . While this may seem like bad news this increased life expectancy also means that many people are reaching retirement age in better physical condition than in previous years . For many this will allow them to continue meaningful work past their normal retirement age . These extra years of work can work wonders if you delay starting Social Security Benefits and they have the same positive effect on any other retirement benefits that you can delay . If you are planning your retirement plan the effect of an increase in life expectancy means that you can change careers if you wish . I know a sixty-seven year old man who has recently started teaching in a local public school . There are a variety of interesting jobs . It is important to determine your interests and get the training to move into that field when your days working in your current job become less than rewarding . For people who have annuity contracts this could be a wonderful opportunity . As their life expectancy increases the payout on the annuity doesnt change . The annuity could become an extremely important part of their retirement plan . If life expectancy continues to increase annuities purchased today could increase in value and utility . The increasing life expectancy may result in your retirement plan offering a lump sum payout . If you receive that offer you should consult with a Retirement Income Certified Professional . The alternatives presented seem to be based on the same data ; however , there might be some reasons to select one option over another . This might be an opportunity to roll over the retirement plan into an IRA that is invested more aggressively . That aggressive IRA might make the difference when inflation raises its ugly head again . The key message to everyone concerned about increasing life expectancy and what it mean to their retirement plans is that each of us needs to Save more , spend less , invest wisely and , if possible , work longer . Some will spend as much time after age 65 as they do working and that requires planning to make sure that there is sufficient income to meet that increasing life expectancy .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
Is an annuity a qualified retirement plan ? NO . An annuity can be `` used '' in or as part of a qualified retirement plan . An annuity on it 's own is not a qualified retirement plan . Where people get confused terminology wise is when they have a product -LRB- like an annuity -RRB- in their retirement plan , so they consider the annuity to `` be '' the retirement plan . The easiest way to think of retirement plans is they are a box , that stuff goes into . A qualified retirement plan is a box that you can put stocks , bonds , mutual funds and annuities into . The `` box '' is what makes them `` qualified . ''
If you are asking how do youcalculate how much do you need to save for retirement there is a process to follow . First you need to determine what retirement success looks like to you . Your retirement planner may be trained to help you if not a lifestyle planner could . The next step to figure out what that lifestyle wouldcostand make a retirementbudget . Now you can do somemeaningfulcalculations . Total up what income you expect from any government plans , pensionplans , etc. . Compare this amount to your retirement lifestyle budget . The difference is what needs to be funded byadditionalsavings . There are calculators on the websites of financialinstitutionsto give you an idea . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
What a retirement plan does is provide financial security . If you are referring to a Registered Retirement Plan then then plan enjoys tax deferred growth . The income is taxed on withdrawal , but tax deferred growth allows for the full effect of compound growth . If you referring to a retirement plan , then you are working towards having what you want to happen , happen . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
As with most plans , ideally first determine the end goal - what does a successful retirement look like to you . Understanding what your objectives are will help you when deciding what direction to take and how much is needed for funding . When designing a retirement plan , taxation is an important factor , you want to take full advantage of the `` miracle of compound interest '' by using tax sheltered growth . Also whether or not contributions are deductible is also a consideration . What about taxation of the income received at retirement . . You will find additional information on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
With financial planing , determining your objectives is the first step . Retirement planning is no different , it is a two part process . First you need to decide what a successful retirement would look like for you and then you need to plan how to fund it . What do you want to do in retirement ? Spend some time discussing this and writing down your objectives . One you have an outline , you can work with a financial planner to design a plan to accomplish your objectives . There is more information on retirement planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Which retirement plan is right for your small business depends on what you what your objectives are and the resources you are willing to commit . Retirement plans for all employees ? Key employees only ? In Canada , if you choose a group RRSP or a defined contribution pension plan , the company can determine the amount of contribution . The amount of the retirement income value or pension depends on investment growth . If you choose a defined benefit pension plan , the the company guarantees the amount of the retirement income and the amount of contribution is unknown . In that case the risk to the company increases . There are a number of solutions available depending on your objectives . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Cover Injury ?
If a homeowner is liable to an injury of another party then under the personal liability section of your homeowners policy there would becoverage Any potential injury needs to be discussed with your agent andinsurancecompany to determine if there iscoveragefor the injury you may have caused .
A home is the largest single purchase that most people make in their lifetime . There are two characteristics that make home ownership difficult . The first is that the ownership of a home creates a situation of responsibility where you become responsible for personal injury and property damage that comes out of home ownership . For example , someone enters you home , slips on a rug and falls . Injuries can be minor or severe . It is quite possible that you could be sued to recover the loss sustained by the person who fell . This is a liability loss . The second is that you have an enormous amount of your money and the mortgage companys money invested in the home . It is usually a multiple of your annual income and would represent a great financial loss were the home to be destroyed . Your mortgage company is particularly concerned about losing their collateral and will require hazard insurance to protect their interests to the greatest extent possible . The list of things that could happen to damage a residence is lengthy but most of the causes or perils are contained in the HO-3 Homeowners policy . There are notable exceptions which should be restated . You are probably not covered for damage caused by earthquake or flood . These coverages are available but in slightly different forms and often with different policies . Because an individual can not sustain the personal loss of a law suit or the destruction of their property they turn to an insurance company to pool their risk with hundreds of thousands of other residences . This recognizes the probability of damage and spreads that risk over a large number of residences . The insurance company charges enough to be able to pay those losses when they occur . Your state insurance commissioner is very concerned about the adequacy of the insurance companies admitted in your state . While there are various types of home insurance policies , I will confine my comments to the most common , the HO-3 Homeowners policy . Coverage A in a homeowners policy covers your residence . The coverage includes additional items but does not cover land or water . It doesnt cover trees except as covered in incidental coverages . Coverage B covers related structures on the property . It has the same restrictions as Coverage A and doesnt cover any business structures , except for a residence on the property that you lease to others . It covers you garage Coverage C covers the personal property that you either own or are responsible for . This is a very important coverage and contains internal limits on selected classes of property such as money , securities , jewelry , guns and watercraft . Misunderstandings often arise about this coverage and it should be discussed thoroughly with your insurance agent . Modifications of this coverage are relatively inexpensive and an unpaid claim is an expensive way to discover that you werent adequately covered . Coverage D pays the necessary and reasonable increase in living cost you incur when your household meets with an insured loss . The company will try to get you back into your residence as quickly as possible but will make sure that you are able to maintain your normal standard of living during the repairs . Coverage D also covers the loss of rents you might experience in the event of a covered loss . If you have an apartment on the premises and it is damaged by a covered loss , this section would apply . There are other limits and extensions in this section that require your attention if you are leasing property . There are number of ancillary coverages including credit cards , trees , fire department charges , debris removal , emergency removal of covered property and grave markers . There are several pages of definitions and exclusions which should be read . Most confusion arising from a homeowners policy come from this part of the policy . Many people think that a homeowners policy pays for routine maintenance or deterioration . Coverage L covers personal liability and provides that the company will pay up to the limits for expense that you are liable for because of bodily injury or property damage that happens on your premises . Coverage M covers medical payments to others and provides necessary medial expenses if they are incurred on your property and result in bodily injury . There are several pages of definitions and limitations on liability coverage . The policy then defines your responsibilities . You must notify the company of a loss , you must cooperate and many other responsibilities . At the back of the policy are a number of endorsements which changes the policy . These apply to specific types of property such as trading cards , animals , a roof and others . Together the HO-3 Homeowners policy is a package of protection that is sufficiently broad to meet the requirements of both lenders and homeowners . Special additional coverages are offered and should be considered . Many of these additional coverages can be included in the basic policy .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare covers home health care services only if all the following conditions are met : Your doctor must decide that you need medical care at home , and make a plan for your care at home . You must need intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech-language therapy , or to continue occupational therapy . The home health agency caring for you must be approved by the Medicare program -LRB- Medicare-certified -RRB- . You must be homebound , or normally unable to leave home without help . Medicare beneficiaries that meet these conditions have coverage for the following types of home health care : Skilled nursing care on a part-time or intermittent basis . Skilled nursing care includes services and care that can only be performed safely and correctly by a licensed nurse -LRB- either a registered nurse or a licensed practical nurse -RRB- . Home health aide services on a part-time or intermittent basis . A home health aide does n't have a nursing license , but supports the nurse by providing services such as help with bathing , using the bathroom , dressing , or other personal care . These types of services do n't need the skills of a licensed nurse . Medicare does n't cover home health aide services unless you are also getting skilled care such as nursing care or other therapy . The home health aide services must be part of the home care for your illness or injury . Physical therapy , speech-language therapy , and occupational therapy for as long as your doctor says you need it . Physical therapy includes exercise to regain movement and strength in a body area , and training on how to use special equipment or do daily activities , like how to get in and out of a wheelchair or bathtub . Speech-language therapy -LRB- pathology services -RRB- includes exercise to regain and strengthen speech skills . Occupational therapy includes exercise to help you do usual daily activities by yourself . You might learn new ways to eat , put on clothes , comb your hair , and perform other usual daily activities . You may continue to receive occupational therapy if ordered by your doctor even if you no longer need other skilled care . Medical social services to help you with social and emotional concerns related to your illness . This might include counseling or help in finding resources in your community . Certain medical supplies , like wound dressings -LRB- but not prescription drugs or biologicals -RRB- . Durable medical equipment , such as a wheelchair or walker . Food and Drug Administration -LRB- FDA -RRB- - approved injectable osteoporosis drugs in certain circumstances . Currently , Medicare does not cover -LRB- does not pay -RRB- for any of the following : 24-hour-a-day care at home ; Meals delivered to your home ; Homemaker services like shopping , cleaning , and laundry ; and Personal care given by home health aides like bathing , dressing , and using the bathroom when this is the only care you need . Most of the time , your doctor , a social worker , or a hospital discharge planner will help arrange for Medicare-covered home health care . However , the decision on which home health care agency or worker belongs to the patent .
Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you . That being said . Below are some of the possible exclusions : A . We do not provide Liability Coverage for any `` insured '' : 1 . Who intentionally causes `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' . 2 . For `` property damage '' to property owned or being transported by that `` insured '' . 3 . For `` property damage '' to property : a. Rented to ; b. Used by ; or c . In the care of ; that `` insured '' . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to `` property damage '' to a residence or private garage . 4 . For `` bodily injury '' to an employee of that `` insured '' during the course of employment . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 4 . -RRB- does not apply to `` bodily injury '' to a domestic employee unless workers compensation benefits are required or available for that domestic employee . 5 . For that `` insureds '' liability arising out of the ownership or operation of a vehicle while it is being used as a public or livery conveyance . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 5 . -RRB- does not apply to a sharethe - expense car pool . 6 . While employed or otherwise engaged in the `` business '' of : a. Selling ; b. Repairing ; c. Servicing ; d. Storing ; or e. Parking ; vehicles designed for use mainly on public highways . This includes road testing and delivery . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 6 . -RRB- does not apply to the ownership , maintenance or use of `` your covered auto '' by : a. You ; b. Any `` family member '' ; or c. Any partner , agent or employee of you or any `` family member '' . 7 . Maintaining or using any vehicle while that `` insured '' is employed or otherwise engaged in any `` business '' -LRB- other than farming or ranching -RRB- not described in Exclusion A. 6 . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 7 . -RRB- does not apply to the maintenance or use of a : a. Private passenger auto ; b. Pickup or van ; or c. `` Trailer '' used with a vehicle described in a. or b. above . 8 . Using a vehicle without a reasonable belief that that `` insured '' is entitled to do so . This Exclusion -LRB- A. 8 . -RRB- does not apply to a `` family member '' using `` your covered auto '' which is owned by you . 9 . For `` bodily injury '' or `` property damage '' for which that `` insured '' : a. Is an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy ; or b. Would be an insured under a nuclear energy liability policy but for its termination upon exhaustion of its limit of liability . A nuclear energy liability policy is a policy issued by any of the following or their successors : a. Nuclear Energy Liability Insurance Association ; b. Mutual Atomic Energy Liability Underwriters ; or c. Nuclear Insurance Association of Canada . B . We do not provide Liability Coverage for the ownership , maintenance or use of : 1 . Any vehicle which : a. Has fewer than four wheels ; or b. Is designed mainly for use off public roads . This Exclusion -LRB- B. 1 . -RRB- does not apply : a . While such vehicle is being used by an `` insured '' in a medical emergency ; b. To any `` trailer '' ; or c. To any non-owned golf cart . 2 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by you ; or b. Furnished or available for your regular use . 3 . Any vehicle , other than `` your covered auto '' , which is : a. Owned by any `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of any `` family member '' . Page 4 of 13 ISO Properties , Inc. , 2003 PP 00 01 01 05 However , this Exclusion -LRB- B. 3 . -RRB- does not apply to you while you are maintaining or `` occupying '' any vehicle which is : a. Owned by a `` family member '' ; or b. Furnished or available for the regular use of a `` family member '' . 4 . Any vehicle , located inside a facility designed for racing , for the purpose of : a. Competing in ; or b. Practicing or preparing for ; any prearranged or organized racing or speed contest .
The short answer : it can cover civil liability if it arises out of negligence due to the driver . Your third party coverage , which is usually denoted as bodily/physical injury are your limits for injuries to other drivers . For example , many people have $ 100,000 / $ 300,000 split limits for bodily injury . This means that your insurance company will cover $ 100,000 per person and $ 300,000 total per accident . Depending upon your policy , attorney 's fees are either included in this limit or have a separate limit . If included in the limit , legal defense expires once the insurance company has paid out the total amount of the policy -LRB- i.e. $ 100,000 per person or $ 300,000 for the accident -RRB- . A good way to avoid being left with huge attorney fees is to either purchase much higher physical injury limits or get an umbrella policy . The umbrella will kick in after you have used up your physical injury limits and cover you up to the stated amount of the umbrella policy . Again , keep in mind that you will only be covered if your negligence is covered within the policy .
A Personal Injury Endorsement is an amendment that can be applied to your Homeowners , Condo Unit owners or Renter 's insurance policy . The basic Liability coverage provided in these forms protect you in the event that you are responsible for the physical injury of another or damage somone else ' property . Personal injury is different in that it does not refer to physical injury of another or property damage , but extends protection for you in the event you are accused of slander , false arrest , defamation and the like . In other words , injuries that you are accused of causing that do not affect the body of another opr their property .
If your house is damaged in a fire , your home insurance will kick in . This insurance will not only pay for fixing up your home , but will also cover a number of other extra costs . The amount of money you get from your insurance depends on a few factors though . The first item your home insurance covers is the damage to your home . The amount you receive for damages depends on the limit of insurance you purchased . If your limit is high enough to cover all damages , your insurance will cover all your home repairs . If you didnt fully cover your house , you may need to pay some of the costs out of your pocket . On top of covering your house , your home insurance will also replace your personal belongings . Once again , the amount you receive depends on the coverage you bought . In addition , home insurance limits the amount it pays on expensive items like jewelry and artwork . If you have any valuables , you may need to buy additional coverage . Lastly , your home insurance will cover the costs of your living somewhere else because of the fire . If you need to live in a hotel and eat at restaurants while your home is repaired , the insurance will pay for these expenses . While home insurance covers your damages in most cases , it wont cover the costs from an intentional fire . This applies to fires started by family members , not by a stranger vandalizing your house . If a member of your household started the damaging fire on purpose , your insurance wont cover your expenses . Unless you fall under this exception , your home insurance should cover the damages of a fire .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
Actually auto insurance can cover both . The physicaldamageportion of the policy will cover damages to the auto . This would be your collision and comprehensivecoverage 's You may carry medical coverage which could cover your own injury . Your policy will also have liability protection which would cover you -LRB- protect you -RRB- for injuries you cause to others and/or law suits . And you may have uninsured/under-insuredmotoristcoveragewhich would cover injuries to yourself and others in yourvehicleshould you be injured by an uninsured orunder-insuredmotorist . Talk to your local agent about thecoverage ` sand options of your auto policy .
Trampolines are an attractive nuisance not unlike the pond on the back forty , They are the source of a lot of additional liability exposure to the policy and the homeowner . The biggest reason that liability increases is because more than one child or person is one the equipment at a time . Most families with a trampoline have n't established risk-based rules for use and enjoyment and so what looks to be a fun and exciting play thing , becomes a hazard teeming with potential to cause great bodily harm . Insurance companies know from experience that trampolines cause losses and are expensive to insure because the injuries can become catastrophic . Broken bones are one thing . A broken neck with paralysis is completely another but well within the outcomes on a trampoline . Add to the trampoline an almost complete lack of training or instruction on the correct methods of use -LRB- and the lack of appropriate rules for use -RRB- , and we find the trampoline becomes similar to a loaded gun just waiting for curious hands with just as much potential to destroy a healthful life . Another issue that crops us is the degradation of the platform fabric since it is exposed to weather and sunlight . People have been known to bust through the platform because it became degraded due to the sun and weather effects . Bones get broke hitting the found and frame members below the deck . In my experience , most companies do n't want anything to do with insuring a home with a trampoline . A relative few do n't charge additional premium and do n't restrict the presence of a trampoline . Others still will permit a trampoline when it is is present for coverage at an additional charge . One carrier we represent charges an additional $ 75 annually for the trampoline , requires the fences to be installed -LRB- most trampolines come with them -RRB- , and they wo n't provide insurance on the home unless the trampoline is also included in coverage . All in all , you do n't simply have the choice to not insure the trampoline since the mere act of having one dramatically increases the chances of having a loss ! That said , trampolines can be enjoyed safely but it requires careful and near constant monitoring by the responsible adults , the establishment of rules for use , the ability to protect the equipment from non-invited use by neighbors when the owner or their children are not using the equipment , and inspection periodically for signs of degradation and normal wear and tear . Additionally , basic skills should be discussed , taught and understood , limits should be placed on the behavior that is allowed on the trampoline , and responsible adults should be willing to stop all play when careful control can not be maintained . Many injuries occur when the parents are not paying attention or aware from the home . Let 's face it , no one wants to be sued for the liability that may arise out of an injury on a trampoline and no one wants to deal with the often catastrophic injuries that can occur to your children or the neighbors . These latter comments and insight are a good foundation for understanding why an insurance company does n't like trampolines and why homeowner insurance is often negatively influenced when they are present on the property .
Life insurance can cover death in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- Full coverage 2 -RRB- AD&D Full coverage means that the life insurance policy will pay out a death benefit regardless of whether death occurs by illness -LRB- including old age & natural causes -RRB- or injury . This is the most common type of life insurance that is purchased because a person is much more likely to die due to illness than they are by an injury -LRB- e.g. car accident or a plane crash -RRB- . AD&D is short for Accidental Death & Dismemberment . This kind of life insurance , while typically cheaper than full coverage , only pays out a death benefit if death occurs due to injury -LRB- the types of injuries that are covered may be outlined in the plan as opposed to general language -RRB- . Given that the average person is much more likely to die due to illness than they are from injuries , full coverage is a much more desired option for people . If a person dies by illness and has an AD&D policy , this coverage will not pay out a death benefit . It 's important to consult with an experienced life insurance broker to compare your options and help you determine the type , amount , and length of coverage that will be most suitable to your needs and budget and which carrier can offer that coverage at the lowest rates . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are 4 major potential losses that your auto policy protects you from : Bodily Injury , Property damage , Personal Injury , and physical damage to your vehicle . Let 's take a quick look at these . Be advised that I 'm speaking specifically for the state of Michigan . Your state may be slightly different . Bodily Injury - In Michigan if you injure someone in an auto crash , you can be sued for : Wrongful Death Disfigurement Loss of Bodily Function Loss of Wages These lawsuits are big dollars . Be sure you 're carrying high enough limits to protect your assets Property Damage - If you cause damage to property with your car , you can be sued to repair or replace that property Personal Injury - This is an injury to the driver and any passengers in the car . In Michigan , there is unlimited lifetime coverage for this . Check in your state for it 's specific limit . Physical Damage to your auto - This is the coverage that will fix your car for a covered accident . One last item I 'll cover is Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist coverage . This is a coverage you carry that will pay you if you are injured in a car accident and the at fault driver either has no insurance or not enough to pay what you 've won in court . I did n't touch on things like towing or rental reimbursement as I did n't really think that was what you were asking , but those coverages are also available as well as some other small , specialized coverages . the auto insurance policy is a complicated animal and you need an agent you can trust to be sure you build the right coverage in a way that you can afford it .
There are several reasons to buy home insurance . Often it is purchased because there is a mortgage on the home and insurance is required by the lender . Outside of this , home insurance covers the loss of the home and its contents from a catastrophic event like a major storm or disaster . Additionally home insurance offers liability protection from people who get injured while at your home and who sue you for damages sustained from such an injury .
Homeowners Insurance does cover Swimming Pools as ` Other Structures ' which is usually 10 % of the Dwelling Coverage amount on the policy . A swimming pool is covered for the same perils that cover the home . The most common covered claim for a swimming pool would be a liability claim or medical payments claim for a slip and fall injury ; some insurance carriers will not insure a home with a pool if there is a diving board or slide in order to avoid this risk . One of the more common questions regarding a swimming pool is coverage for cracks in the pool . Cracks are usually caused by land movement or earthquakes ; this is not covered on a homeowners policy . Earthquake coverage would need to be purchased to cover this sort of damage to a swimming pool ; however , the deductible and special limits will apply to swimming pools . Please review your coverage details prior to purchasing coverage .
OK , this will be a quick run down of coverages most commonly needed but the answer may vary some form state to state : The first coverage you need is Bodily Injury Liability . This is the amount of coverage you need to protect yourself from the claims and law suits of people you injure . The second but related coverage is the Property damage coverage for property you destroy . So it is common in the US to sell them in groups such as 100/300/100 . Now what does that mean : The first number is critical . This is the per person limit of bodily injury liability . Insurers are not stupid . They know that in 75 % of all accidents , there will be one person in each vehicle -LRB- it is just the way Americans drive -RRB- So , there is a lot less likelihood of hitting that 300,000 but it would take injury to more than one person to do it . So the odds are with your insurer . Another way to buy insurance -LRB- usually about 10 % more in cost -RRB- is through Combined Single Limits coverage , CSL gives you one bulk sum to pay the claim more as the accident happened rather than based on the sub limits of your policy . So split limits are the norm , but for a little more you might want combined single limit coverage . The next coverage is usually PIP or Medical Payments . Both of these sort of compensate for usually minor events for which the party is injured and you want to take care of the injury regardless of fault . For example you give a ride to a friend who slams the door on his finger . Yes it was his fault , but it was your car and you do n't want suing you over this . Your policy responds with either medical payment or Personal Injury . PIP is usually broader and often includes wages loss which Med Pay does not . The next group of coverages are usually the most important on your policy . These are your uninsured or under-insured motorist coverage . In about 14 % of accidents the at fault party will have no insurance . And in the next grouping of the accidents you will see coverage of the at fault party at state minimums or not much more . . Now you need the protection of UM coverage . A good rule of thumb is never buy less UM than you have for Bodily Injury Liability . This is now you protecting yourself , your family and passengers in your car . It is perhaps the most little understood coverage and most important part of your policy.Lastly as respects UM/UIM you need Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist Property Damage at a level commensurate with the ACV of you car . Next come the coverages on the physical damage to your car . The coverages are Comprehensive or also called OTC or Other than Collision . which covers many perils such as theft , fire , flood , trees falling on the vehicle etc. . Collision occurs when you hit something such as a tree , a road curb , a pothole , another vehicle etc. . This is where the value of your car is a consideration . You should also select a deductible that is right for you and your household budget From here we go to many ancillary coverages including Rental Reimbursement which is usually stated as a dollar limit for thirty days -LRB- enough time usually to get your car repaired -RRB- > The coverage is triggered by another cause of loss such as collision . The next and perhaps last coverage to consider for the general public is towing or as some companies offer road side assistance . Towing is just that towing . Whereas roadside service is usually sign and drive towing , run out of gas , lock out of car etc. . Now if you have a new car you might want replacement coverage or if leased gap coverage for loan or lease . If you do n't understand any of this gives us a call , We believe an educated consumer is better for every one .
Firstly , we hope your son continues to recover and has a full and speedy recovery . Our thoughts and prayers are with him . If you are injured in an automobile accident , and you have minor or significant injuries , nearly all companies will pay for the medical expenses , up to the stated limits of the policy that is providing coverage . Medical payments coverage , although optional , is covered on nearly all policies in `` fault '' states . If the driver of the other car is at-fault , they are required to carry specific minimum limits of bodily injury . Typically it is between $ 15,000 and $ 30,000 per person . If it is a `` no-fault '' state , PIP -LRB- Personal Injury Protection -RRB- is typically required and will pay for the damages , although it does not matter who was at fault . Lost wages would also be covered . If the other driver has no car insurance , then uninsured motorist protection of the driver of your vehicle can step in and pay . If your driver is not covered , you can utilize your healthcare coverage or begin litigation against the driver . IMPORTANT : Answer was provided by Edward Harris , one of the leading US car insurance brokers with more than 30 years of experience . His award-winning website Carinsurancezoom.org provides free online quotes and offers the lowest auto insurance rates from the most reputable companies .
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can A Non Citizen Get Life Insurance ?
A non citizen can get life insurance with most companies if they have a green card or an H-1b work visa . Some companies do require that the applicant be a US citizen before allowing them to get a life insurance policy , and some will only allow green cards but not work visas . Contact an agent to find out which companies will work for your situation .
Yes you can but most insurance companies require that you have been in the country for 3 or 6 months . This will vary from carrier to carrier . It will also depend on your frequency of travel outside of the USA and if you will be traveling to certain `` high risk '' countries often or not .
Yes . A legal , non-citizen resident of the U.S. can get health insurance domestically . To make things even more interesting , ObamaCare contains provisions that may actually be more advantageous to legal non-citizens than to American citizens . Section 1401 of the Affordable Care Act created Section 36B of the IRS code which includes `` Special Rule For Certain Individuals Lawfully Present In the United States '' . This rule states that lawfully present aliens with incomes under the Federal Poverty guidelines who `` are not eligible for Medicaid under Title XIX of the Social Security Act by reason of such alien status '' shall be treated as though they had incomes above the Federal poverty level , thus entitling them to Federal insurance subsidies . This can lead to the situation where a lower income American citizen is forced into Medicaid -LRB- or left uncovered if they fall into the gap area in states that did not raise their minimum eligibility threshold for Medicaid eligibility -RRB- while a legal non-citizen at the same income level will be allowed to purchase health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and to qualify for subsidies for their health insurance premiums .
Yes , a non US citizen can get life insurance with many American companies . It is up to the discretion of each company as to what type of citizenship or residency they will accept . A green card is usually OK , and many companies will accept a work visa as qualification for applying for life insurance in the US . Getting life insurance in the US as a non US citizen , however , almost always requires having a residence in the United States .
You do not have to be a citizen to obtain life insurance . US life insurers require that the proposed insured must be a permanent resident of the US . That means a US citizen or a non US citizen who is a lawful permanent US resident -LRB- green card -RRB- or on certain visa types . The applicant would also need to have the means to pay premiums and have a demonstrable life insurance need i.e. generating earned income or assets to protect here . Some insurers have developed foreign national programs that can also work in situations where established US interests and ties exist plus meeting some additional criteria . Citizens of some countries may not be eligible . It can be a complex area of field underwriting - so much so that our firm has developed a special questionnaire to help shop for coverage . Be sure to work with a life insurance professional with experience in this area .
Most life insurers in the US stipulate that the proposed insured must be a permanent resident of the US . That means a US citizen or a non US citizen who is a lawful permanent US resident -LRB- green card -RRB- or on certain visa types . There would also have to be a means to pay premiums and a demonstrable life insurance need i.e. generating earned income or assets to protect here . Some insurers have developed foreign national programs that can also work in situations where established US interests and ties exist plus meeting some additional criteria . Citizens of some countries may not be eligible . It can be a complex area of field underwriting - so much so that our firm has developed a special questionnaire to help shop for coverage . Be sure to work with a life insurance professional with experience in this area .
A non citizen can get life insurance with most companies if they have a green card or an H-1b work visa . Some companies do require that the applicant be a US citizen before allowing them to get a life insurance policy , and some will only allow green cards but not work visas . Contact an agent to find out which companies will work for your situation .
Universal health insurance can also be referred to as single payor health insurance and is a term used to denote a health insurance system that covers all citizens of a nation . Generally the concept of a Universal Health Insurance system is used in reference to the government run or managed systems such as are found in Canada and many European countries . While there are variations on the theme from country to country the objective , as the name implies , it to provide health insurance coverage to every citizen of the country regardless of their income or health status . Usually Universal Health Insurance systems are funded by taxes paid by the nation 's citizens and businesses . The concept of Universal Health Insurance sounds appealing to many and is becoming part of the ongoing debate in the United States about how to finance our citizen 's health care needs . In theory everyone would have comprehensive health insurance coverage with the cost spread out amongst every citizen and with lower overhead costs as a single , government run agency administers the health insurance system . In practical terms , the real world results of such systems have fallen short of perfection and have their own sets of problems and sources of dissatisfaction just as we experience with our current mixture of private and public based health insurance systems here in the United States .
A non US citizen can buy life insurance with most life insurance companies if he or she is a permanent United States resident -LRB- i.e. has a Green Card -RRB- or is legally working in the US temporarily -LRB- has an H-1B visa -RRB- . Some companies will exclude coverage to anyone except a United States citizen , more often in the case of some simplified issue products .
According to the law , health care assistance is for U.S.citizens who can not pay for there medical needs.When Obamacare is implemented everyone who is a U.S. citizen is mandated by the government to participant in the health care program . There is no provision in the health care law of non U.S. citizens .
Yes , non US citizens who are lawful permanent US residents -LRB- green card -RRB- or on certain visa types with a demonstrable life insurance need and generating earned income here is one way that will work most insurers though there may be limitations e.g. no term . Some insurers have developed foreign national programs that can also work in situations where established US interests and ties exist plus meeting some additional criteria . Citizens of some countries may not be eligible . It can be a complex area of field underwriting - so much so that our firm has developed a special questionnaire to help determine the best path . Be sure to work with a life insurance professional with experience in this area .
The premise of being U.S. Citizen is that you benefit from the commonwealth of belonging to the nation . Non U.S. citizens are legally prohibited from benefits , including health care . If Non citizens are securing benefits , they 're doing so illegally . Whether state or federal enforcement exercises the law is another question .
There is no law that requires a US citizen to purchase life insurance like the new ACA law that requires all US citizens purchase health insurance , There are situations where life insurance can be required such as court ordered due to a divorce or child custody case or even adoptions . Also lenders such as mortgage companies can require a person to purchase life insurance to secure a large debt .
If you are lucky enough to work for an employer who pays 100 % of the employee rate for the group health insurance they offer -LRB- pretty rare these days -RRB- then standard group contracts require all eligible employees to be enrolled . So , in that circumstance you might get health insurance coverage whether you want it or not . If you have to contribute towards the cost of the health insurance provided by your employer then you have the right to waive participating in your employer 's group health plan . I will presume , though , that your question is really about the `` Individual Mandate '' provision of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and its requirement starting on January 1 , 2014 that a person have health insurance coverage that meets the minimum essential benefit requirements under the law or be subject to the `` Shared Responsibility Payment '' -LRB- does n't that sound better than tax penalty ? -RRB- on your income taxes . ObamaCare does give you the choice of either getting health insurance coverage or going without coverage and potentially being subject to a tax penalty . In that sense you can opt out of having health insurance coverage . But wait there 's more ! The Affordable Care Act provides for persons in certain situations or who are members of certain groups to be exempt from the individual mandate requirement . Some examples are ; 1 -RRB- If the cost of coverage for you is more than 8 % of your annual household income 2 -RRB- If your annual income is below the threshold where you have to file personal income taxes 3 -RRB- If you qualify for a `` hardship '' exemption -LRB- this can be an escape route for many people -RRB- 4 -RRB- If you have had a gap in being covered of less than 3 months during the tax year 5 -RRB- Members of religious groups that object to coverage on religious grounds 6 -RRB- Members of non-profit religious organizations where members share costs 7 -RRB- Prison inmates 8 -RRB- Non U.S. citizens 9 -RRB- Native American tribe members 10 -RRB- Year long residents of U.S. territories such as Puerto Rico and Guam What could be more simple ? I hope this helps answer your question .
Anyone who is a U.S. citizen or a legal resident can get health insurance . If you are an incarcerated -LRB- in jail -RRB- U.S. citizen or legal resident you are not eligible to purchase private health insurance because you are already enjoying health care services being provided at the expense of your state 's taxpayers or all taxpayers if you are in Federal prison .
From the practical point of view only , the answer is no -LRB- but even this answer ca n't be separated from the politics as much as I would like -RRB- . I suspect that your question is hinged in some political viewpoint so I will avoid the political implications . Now , should people insure for the liability they have the potential to create ? In that case , I say YES . It is common sense from how I think . That said , however , most gun owners I know and have insured during my career are law-abiding , conscientious citizens and they buy liability insurance that will likely apply in one extent or another to non-intentional events with a gun and these policies will likely pay the amounts and events permissible by policy language . I know of no policy language in personal liability policies that prohibits paying for injuries caused to another while hunting , or of damage to the property of others caused by non-intentional and unintended discharge of the gun . However , I would hazard to say that it would n't be long before carriers would react to reduce and eliminate their exposure if our politics insisted upon coverage or attempted to mandate coverage . It is well understood that the gun wo n't shoot without the act of some human to make it work . -LRB- Except for Google -RRB- Cars wo n't drive without drivers . Legal , responsible gun owners are not the people we read about in the news . Note : Applying this answer to a business or commercial enterprise is unwise and my answer was directed towards a personal application . Different answers apply in the case of a business out of necessity .
We offer a policy through International Medical Group that works for many of these situations . Most health insurance companies do n't want to provide a policy for non-citizens , but IMG has created niche products to address this specific situation . You can shoot me a message and I can either help you or find someone who can .
That is a great question ! There are a couple of reasons why a whole life policy makes sense . One would be if it is purchased for a young child . The price is locked in at that low rate for their entire life , and many companies will offer the opportunity to increase that coverage without any questions . The second is that the policy does n't end , so there is no way that you can outlive it . Many senior citizens purchase the policy advertised on TV by the large senior citizen advocate company , only to find that it ends when they turn 80 . Given that the average life expectancy is 84 for women and 82 for men , for many that is a terrible surprise to find that the policy ends , and that getting another one is too expensive , or not available due to their health issues . The third is that no matter how badly your health declines , you have insurance that ca n't drop you , or raise your rates . When your term policy ends , and youwant to get another one , your age and health issues are re-evaluated when determining eligibility and price . Please feel free to contact me if you would like to discuss this further . Thanks for asking !
A non US citizen may be able to purchase Medicare . Residents are allowed to purchase Medicare if they have not qualified to receive it when they turn 65 . There are premiums for part A and part B . If the person is not in the country legally then they would not be able to .
Yes , but not all companies will underwrite a foriegn national . Your citizenship status should be one of the things you provide the agent who is doing the footwork for you . Some carriers only underwrite US citizens , some only Canadian and US citizens and some will underwrite just about anyone without a problem .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
How Does Type Of Car Affect Insurance ?
Each automobile is assigned a symbol based upon its year , make and model . The symbol reflects the anticipated cost of paying claims on that vehicle . Vehicles with a high horsepower to weight ratio tend to have a higher incident of claims than 4 door sedans with 4 cylinder automatic engines . This approach tries to make the collection of premium reflect the actual cost of insuring a particular car .
The type , age , model year etc. of aa car may certainly affect the amount of premium a company charges to insure it . A new car for example , will usually cost more to insure than an older car in part because if the value of the car itself . Likewise , the type and weight of a vehcle may make a difference as well . Insuring a Dodge Ram pickup fr example will cost more in liability premium than a Hyudai Sonata because a pickup can cause more damage and potential injury because of it 's increased mass and weight . An insurance compoany uses many different factors in order to develop what they believe is the proper premium to reflect the risk that they are asked to insure .
Nowadays , car color does not have an affect on the cost of auto insurance . The things that will affect the amount you will spend are age of driver , residence location , driving history , insurance history , type of car , age of car , and cost of car . This is a very generalized list I gave you , and there are many other factors that go into the cost , but these are the most basic ones . I hope this helps you to better understand how the cost of auto insurance is formulated . Thanks for asking !
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
Diabetes does affect life insurance rates , but how much diabetes affects life insurance depends on the level of diabetic control . More than whether you are type 1 or type 2 , whether you use oral med or use insulin , whether you were diagnosed at age 10 or diagnosed at age 50 , your A1C number matters . If it is over 10 , the amount of life insurance you can get will be limited and the price will be very high . If under 8 , a person with diabetes can get affordable rates , even though higher than someone who has no health issues whatsoever .
Divorce does affect life insurance but maybe not in the way you are asking your question . It does not affect your premiums or cost but it will affect other aspects of your policy . The first thing that needs to be addressed is the beneficiary . You may not want your ex to receive your life insurance proceeds . Next aspect to be examined is your face amount . Now that you are on your own , do you have the proper amount of life insurance for children , loved ones to cover debt , etc. ? Last is the term or type of policy . Are the premiums guaranteed for the proper amount of time ? I recommend sooner rather than later sitting down with your agent to address these needs before it becomes too late .
Depression can affect life insurance rates very little , or it can affect them a lot . The severity of the depression , whether or not there were suicidal thoughts or attempt -LRB- s -RRB- , whether there was hospitalization for depression -LRB- and if so , how often and how long ago -RRB- , if the applicant is on disability for depression , how many medications are being used to treat the depression , and whether therapy is part of the treatment can all affect the rates . Mild depression treated with only one medication can result in preferred rates . A long history of depression that is resistant to treatment and has a high risk of suicide can result in a decline . In my experience , severe depression is far less common than mild depression , and most policies involving depression get rated favorably .
Yes , scuba diving can affect life insurance rates . Recreational scuba diving less than 50 feet does not affect rates at all with many life insurance companies , so that if you are able to get the best rating based on your health , your diving will not bring that rating down . Some will allow the best or Preferred rating for divers who are experienced and do not exceed a depth of 75 ' . Being a certified diver and/or diving only in a club or with an instructor helps get the best rates . When dives are over 75 ' or the diver does cave diving , rescue diving or diving alone in remote areas , the scuba diving can bring rates down to Standard , add a flat extra , or even cause a decline . Agents familiar with this type of policy can get all the pertinent details from you and find out ahead of time which company has the best price for your particular type of scuba diving .
The type , age , model year etc. of aa car may certainly affect the amount of premium a company charges to insure it . A new car for example , will usually cost more to insure than an older car in part because if the value of the car itself . Likewise , the type and weight of a vehcle may make a difference as well . Insuring a Dodge Ram pickup fr example will cost more in liability premium than a Hyudai Sonata because a pickup can cause more damage and potential injury because of it 's increased mass and weight . An insurance compoany uses many different factors in order to develop what they believe is the proper premium to reflect the risk that they are asked to insure .
Great question ! The answer is absolutely ! There are two types of skin cancer , one more serious than the other . If you have the simpler , more common type , it is n't generally anything that will affect your policy . They remove it , and you are cancer free . The other type is a little more serious , and can affect your policy . If you 've had this type , you can still get a preferred policy if it was in your past , and you 've not had it since . If you are fresh out of it , or had ongoing struggles , there are still policies that you can purchase . They may have a period of time where the benefit paid is reduced , and will be more expensive , but they can be purchased . If you need more information , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
No , basal cell carcinoma does not have much of an effect on life insurance premiums , if any . Squamous cell carcinoma does affect rates more , depending on the stage , how long ago it was removed , and whether there was any recurrence or multiple spots . Melanoma , of course , has the most significant impact on life insurance rates of cancer affecting the skin , and may cause a decline if past stage 1 occurred within the past year .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
There are many factors that affect the policy premium pricing . Therefore , more questions than answers ... initially ... First of all , what State are we talking about , since rates vary greatly from State to State , not to mention significant regional variations within a State ? For one example , think of a coastal location exposure to wind vs. a dwelling located inland and not generally exposed to the same potential perils . Which one is going to present the highest chance of risk for wind damage losses ? This will definitely affect the premium . Additionally , one insurance company 's rates can vary greatly from those of another . Also , a few of the many other questions : What is the amount of intended insurance needed on the dwelling ? How old is the home ? What type of construction ? What type of fire protection and proximity to the dwelling ? What other types of protection devices and method of monitoring ? Any dangerous animal breeds ? Swimming pool ? You really need to talk to an agent about rates in your location . Ask for quotes from the strongest carriers . Ask particularly about their financial strengths and claims paying histories . Try to get carriers with A.M Best ratings of A or better , if at all possible . Additionally , many State Insurance Departments have consumer information for the public , relating to homeowner polices . Do some of your own ` on-line ' research , if possible . You can also ask other homeowners in your area about their carriers ' pricing and experiences with claims .
There are various factors that are included when an insurance company files pricing with a state 's Insurance Department . The obvious factors have to do with a driver 's record of accidents and infractions . Many companies have also determined that one 's credit standing can be a measurable factor when calculating the rate one would pay for car insurance . The car itself has a great deal to do with a policy 's pricing with regard to both Comprehensive and Collision , but Liability as well . Think of the kind of damage that can be caused by a large sized SUV vs a sub compact car . Finally , the coverage chosen directly affects the amount you pay . If two people live next to each other , own the very same make and model car , have a clean record and are insured by the same company , neighbor A is paying less because he is only carrying the state minimum requirement for liability coverage , while neighbor B is paying more because he has chosen the more complete protection offered by higher liabillity coverage limits . These are just a few examples of factors that affect the price you pay .
Although many auto insurance companies inquire about occupation , the answer you give them does not affect the rates . They ask this question as more of a screening than anything else . They want to make sure you are not using the vehicle for commercial use -LRB- which would not be covered under a personal auto policy -RRB- . For example , if you list your occupation as a delivery driver , they may ask you additional underwriting questions to make sure you are insuring the vehicle on the right type of policy -LRB- or at least make you aware of the fact that you 're not covered while using the vehicle commercially -RRB- . There are however , private insurance companies who only sell to certain groups -LRB- e.g. military personnel , teachers , govt . workers , etc -RRB- They can offer very low rates at times . But never have I seen the type of occupation affect rates with a public auto insurance company .
If your question is what affects the stability of life insurance rates , the answer is , not very much . Life insurance rates are based on multiple millions of lives and death rates are predictable . A dramatic change in the financial markets could affect life insurance rates if the companies can not earn the necessary returns to maintain their promises . A dramatic epidemic could affect rates . Recently rates were affected by regulation . These changes are generally small .
A DUI can affect life insurance rates , or even cause a decline . But if the DUI happened years ago , it may not affect your rate at all . The key factor with a DUI is how long ago it occurred ; whether there was more than one DUI ; and , if alcohol treatment was ordered , whether you continue to drink alcohol . One DUI over 5 years ago will affect rates far less than repeat DUI 's within a few years , especially if alcohol abuse/addiction is present .
Claims will affect your home insurance but other variables are considered . Other variable include , how long you have been with the insurance company , how many claims you have filed , type of claims , payment for each claim , credit , other policies with the same insurance company . Filling a claim does not automatically increase your rate but filing several claims will .
Be sure to look at your state regulations however Life Insurance in general should not affect Medicaid , especially if it is just a term type or non-cash value building policy . The issue with Medicaid of course is how much money do you have and income you have . If you can draw income from your Life Insurance then , it may affect your qualification .
The short answer is NO ! This is a question commonly asked by clients , especially those that are looking for new insurance on a car or house they are wanting to finance . Every inquiry , they people are told , can lower their credit and could affect the interest rate on the final loan . While this is a general statement that is often true , it is very broad and non-specific and overlooks certain key details that you need to know . Keep in mind there are two different types of credit inquires : hard inquiries and soft inquiries . Maybe you have heard of these by different names , but here is what I mean by hard and soft credit pulls . A hard inquiry is one where you are looking to obtain a line of credit such as through an auto finance company , a store credit card at a retail store like BestBuy or Sears , a gas card at your Shell gas station , a mortgage -LRB- new purchase or refinance -RRB- , and sometimes when opening a utility in your name -LRB- though not always -RRB- or trying to rent a property . Every time you apply for credit , the underwriters -LRB- people who decide to extend you credit , how much and at what interest rate -RRB- can see the inquiries AND some of the FICO score models are about 10 % composed by the number of inquiries that you have . Basically , the more credit you apply for the riskier you become because you either are getting declined and the new company wants to know why , or you are getting a lot of credit and the next company has concerns that you can pay all of this new credit at once . Therefore , it is important that you keep all the inquires to a minimum when possible -LRB- less than 2 is ideal , zero being the most preferred . -RRB- A general rule is that you have to authorize someone to look at your credit for a hard inquiry . Conversely , a soft inquiry is what companies use when they are looking at credit but not offering a line of credit to you directly . This is what most utility companies use to make sure you dont have specific items on your credit report they are looking for when considering opening an account in your name ; they usually are looking for late-pays and other items but not necessarily your credit score . NOBODY sees these inquiries except for the individual when pulling up their credit report -LRB- which can be done for free once a year . -RRB- So you might get a credit report and see 2 inquiries -LRB- one for the credit card you applied for and the other for a car you tried to refinance -RRB- but then another 5-10 other inquires you arent even familiar with . These could include the credit card companies sending you pre-approval letters to apply for a new credit card or utility companies when you moved to your new apartment . Dont panic as these dont affect your score . With that being said , which one of these inquires is insurance ? Insurance is a soft inquiry that does not affect your credit score . If you talk to an independent agent when buying a house , you could see multiple soft inquiries on your credit report from companies like ASI , The Hartford , Safeco , Erie , Kemper , Foremost , Mercury , and many other companies . This is because each of these companies wants to know your credit-worthiness or financial responsibility because it has a direct relationship with you paying insurance on time AND with the number of claims that you file -LRB- better credit means less claims as a general trend -RRB- . So dont be afraid to get a quote for insurance . Your loan officer or bank manager or whomever is right in saying dont apply for new lines of credit or anything that pulls as a hard inquiry , since that affects your score . However , getting an insurance quote for home , auto , life , or health insurance doesnt affect your credit at all . Dont forget to pull your credit report once a year from the 3 major credit bureaus . You will probably see your new insurance company on there . However , insurance companies wouldnt pull credit if it wasnt important to make sure to review your credit once a year and verify everything is accurate . The only official website is annualcreditreport.com so go there for your free reports .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
Is Disability Insurance Payments Taxable ?
In Canada , disability insurance payments are usually structured so that the payment is tax free . This applies to individual plans as well as group plans . The basic principle is , if the premium is paid with after tax dollars , then the benefit is tax free . If the premium is deducted as an expense -LRB- employee benefit -RRB- , then the benefit payment is taxable . That is why with group insurance plans the premium split is structured so that the employee pays the Long Term Disability -LRB- LTD -RRB- portion of the premium . This is done to keep the benefit tax free . Plans can be structured to provide a benefit to employees with the company paying the premium on the policies and deducting it as an expense . Certain rules need to be followed . Here is an overview : Company pays premium for coverage , gets the deduction , employee does not pay tax on the premium `` benefit '' , but any disability benefit is taxable . In order to offset the income tax , the amount of coverage the employee is permitted to apply for is increased . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Disability insurance you purchase without the financial contribution of your employer towards the premium expense of individual disability insurance will generally be free of income taxation . This tax treatment results from the circumstances . First , the money used to pay premiums are `` after-tax '' dollars . In other words , you already paid tax on the money used to pay the disability premiums when it was earned as income . Second , neither an employer or business will take a deduction on their tax returns for the payments made to provide the insurance to you . These two things make the income earned under a personal , individual disability policy free of income tax on the benefits . As a general rule , if a business pays for the a portion of the premium the benefit is probably taxable to some extent even when you contribute . The amount of the benefit that is taxable will be determined by the ratio of the total premium paid , compared against the premium amounts paid by the business and the individual . If the benefit is payable to a business the income is probably taxable . Corporate -LRB- or business -RRB- owned disability insurance can be designed to provide income or overhead expense protection . Overhead expense protection permits the deduction of cost on tax forms but the income is taxable . There is also the possibility that disability income coverage is used in a buy-sell agreement . When the benefit is paid to a business , as a general rule , the benefit is taxable . As in most instances , this general answer can not begin to address the variety of complicating circumstances so specific answers are best for specific situations .
In Canada , it is usually recommended that employees pay for their own group disability insurance . The reason is that if the employer pays for that portion of the group premium then the benefit -LRB- disability income -RRB- is taxable to the employee . The usual scenario has the employer and employee each paying 50 % of the total group premium . Under certain circumstances . it possible to structure individual policies where the company pays for the entire premium and deducts it as an expense . In this case the benefit -LRB- disability income -RRB- is taxable to the employee should he/she become disabled . The amount of income they could qualify for is increased to recognize the income would be taxable . The payment of the premium is not considered to be taxable benefit since the disability income is taxable . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
In a word , yes . But , it 's more complicated than that . There are three different types of DI insurance and each has its on tax-treatment strategies .1 . Individual disability insurance -LRB- IDI -RRB- - This is what most people are referring to when they use the term `` DI '' . It replaces a percentage of income . It comes in two flavors : long-term and short-term . If the premium is deducted as a health insurance medical expense on a schedule C , the income replacement benefit - should one become disabled - may be taxable as regular income . If it is `` paid-out-of-pocket '' , the income replaced when disabled is not income taxable . The choice should be referred to a qualified tax advisor as insurance agents are not authorized to advise on tax issues . However , I do n't know a CPA that would recommend deducting premiums as a health insurance business expense . If one becomes disabled , they are going to want their benefit checks to be free from income taxes .2 . Business Overhead Expense -LRB- BOE , or simply OE -RRB- - If a business owner or partner becomes disabled , this type of insurance pays for a percentage of fixed business expenses . In my experience , tax advisors will direct that the premiums for this coverage be deducted as a business expense because while that makes the benefits income-taxable , the benefits will immediately pay for business expenses which are deductible . So , it 's a bit of a wash , so to speak .3 . Buy-out disability insurance - This type of DI is most commonly purchased to sever a business relationship of an owner or partner that becomes totally disabled and thereby be a drain on the business without being able to actively produce or grow the company . The amount paid out is a lump sum which can be based on percentage of ownership -LRB- or stock -RRB- and theoretically be placed into a fund that would produce a continuing income to the bought-out owner or partner . Typically , the business owns this policy and pays premium on it . The tax treatment of the premium and payout depends on how the Articles of Incorporation are written or what kind of buy-sell agreement is in place . Both the company attorney and tax advisor need to be in on how the contract is titled and who pays premium at the time of application.It is imperative for the consumer of DI insurance to consult with qualified legal and tax advisors if there is any question at all about how the payment of premiums will be treated and/or the benefits used . The agent may offer an opinion , but it should not be accepted as legal or tax advice .
In Canada , disability insurance payments are usually structured so that the payment is tax free . This applies to individual plans as well as group plans . The basic principle is , if the premium is paid with after tax dollars , then the benefit is tax free . If the premium is deducted as an expense -LRB- employee benefit -RRB- , then the benefit payment is taxable . That is why with group insurance plans the premium split is structured so that the employee pays the Long Term Disability -LRB- LTD -RRB- portion of the premium . This is done to keep the benefit tax free . Plans can be structured to provide a benefit to employees with the company paying the premium on the policies and deducting it as an expense . Certain rules need to be followed . Here is an overview : Company pays premium for coverage , gets the deduction , employee does not pay tax on the premium `` benefit '' , but any disability benefit is taxable . In order to offset the income tax , the amount of coverage the employee is permitted to apply for is increased . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Disability Insurance will qualify for a business expense if the business pays for the policy and does not receive any of the benefit received . However the employee of the business will need to report any disability income benefits received as taxable income . The same holds true if a professional such as a physician or dentist is incorporated and has a salary or wage continuation plan in the corporate minutes . The corporation may pay for the policy but any benefits received are taxable as income . How premiums for coverage can be changed from year to year . For individual disability policies , in the event of a claim , whether benefits are taxed or not depends on how the premiums were paid during the year of claim . For group disability polices there is a three year look back for premiums . Overhead/practice expense disability policies are always tax deductible and benefits received by the business/practice are not taxable .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Usually no , life insurance proceeds paid to a beneficiary are not taxable . There are certain circumstances that could make the proceeds taxable but these are generally rare incidences . If the proceeds are taxable the life insurer will provide you with proper notice to let you know that payment of the proceeds is a taxable event .
That is a great question ! A tax deferred annuity is a great way to helpfund a retirement plan . In this type of vehicle , the money that you put into the annuity grows steadily . The interest that it earns stays in the annuity , and is n't counted yearly as income , so is n't taxable . Once the point comes when you start taking payments from it however , that earned interest becomes taxable , and is counted as income . Everything in the annuity over the amount that you started with is considered taxable income and you will count the interest on your taxes each year that you receive payments . The idea behind this strategy is that once you 've retired , you 've dropped in your yearly earnings , and thus into a lower tax bracket , and yet again saved money . If you would like more detail on this financial tool , please contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Annuity payments are taxable as Capitol Gains the year they are received . If the Annuity is used to fund an IRA/401k/SEP , then the annuity payments will be taxable as Income the year they are received . The only exception would be if the Annuity is in a ROTH IRA or 401K . Then the Annuity payments would be Income Tax free assuming all IRS requirements are met .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
Whether a `` Life Insurance check '' is taxable depends on what kind of life insurance check it is . You did n't say if it was the death benefit proceeds , or if it was a cash withdrawal from the policy , or if it was a loan against the cash value of the policy . The payment of the death benefit to the beneficiary is NOT taxable . A check for a LOAN against the cash value is NOT taxable . However if you surrender the policy for the cash value or if you do a partial surrender for cash , if you receive more money than you have paid in , -LRB- cash basis of the policy -RRB- , then the amount in excess of premiums paid in WILL be taxable as ordinary income .
In Canada , if you personally pay the premium of an individual or group disability insurance then the benefit is tax free . If the company pays the premiums then the disability benefit would be taxable . In some corporate situations it is possible to structure individual policies so that the company deducts the premium and it is not considered a taxable benefit to the employee . However , if the employee is disabled the benefit are taxable . To offset the disability benefit being the amount you are allowed to qualify for based on your income is increased . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
In general , yes , the life insurance death benefit is income tax-free -LRB- IRC Section 101 -LRB- a -RRB- -RRB- . But , there are situations where this benefit may be lost . If too much premium is paid into the policy in violation of Section 7702 of the IRC , the policy is no longer considered life insurance , and the death benefit is income taxable . Insurance companies monitor this and usually take action to prevent such violations . Insurance professionals worry more about the following more common situations where the death benefit can be taxable since the burden is on the policy owner to monitor and violations are usually not caught before it is too late . 1 . Since 2006 , new rules apply to life insurance in a business context which subjects the life insurance death benefit to income tax . If the policy does not meet the special requirements of Section 101 -LRB- j -RRB- such as the notice and consent or protected class requirementsthe death benefit may be income taxable . There is also an annual IRS reporting requirement -LRB- Form 8925 -RRB- . We find most small business owners are not aware , especially of the latter requirement . Most tax professionals are usually not aware either . This is a common and growing problem which generally can not be corrected -LRB- except to cancel policies and start over -RRB- . 2 . Three parties to a policy -LRB- aka Goodman triangle -RRB- : If a third-party owner names a different third-party beneficiary of a life contract , the proceeds may be income taxable or gift taxable . 3 . If the policy falls within the transfer-for-value rule and does not qualify for a safe-harbor exception , its death benefit is income taxable . Business owners should meet with a life insurance professional who can perform a comprehensive policy review and can coordinate with your tax and legal advisors . These comments are for planning purposes only and are not tax or legal advice .
As with so many things in life , the answer is `` it depends '' . If you are talking about Social Security disability benefits it will depend upon the type of disability benefit you are receiving . Supplemental Security Income -LRB- SSI -RRB- disability benefits , which are for certain low income individuals e.g. - blind , aged , disabled and below certain income thresholds -RRB- who do not qualify for regular Social Security Disability can not have their SSI payments garnished for child support . On the other hand , standard Social Security Disability payments can be garnished to meet child support obligations . While it is much more complicated , it is also possible that a portion of VA disability benefits can be garnished for child support . Finally , if you are receiving disability payments through an individual or group disability insurance policy those payments can be garnished for child support purposes though the specifics vary from state to state .
The cash surrender value in life insurance is only taxable on the amount over your basis . Let me explain . Basis is considered the premium you paid in . For example , lets say over 20 years , you paid $ 1000 per year , totaling $ 20k . In this example , the cash value is $ 35k . The taxable amount is going to be what you have earned over the $ 20k you put in so $ 15,000 in this example is taxable . Consider however not surrendering this policy but taking loans out instead . Loans are not taxable , do not have to be paid back although I would recommend doing so in many situations , and as long as you pay the premiums on the policy to keep it in force , you will have no tax concerns . The Key here is NOT to let the policy lapse . Otherwise you may have a taxable event if the money you took out as a loan is greater that your basis . Contact your agent or reach out to me if you would like to learn why I would recommend you pay yourself back on the loan . Good Luck .
Non-qualified annuity distributions of gain are taxable at ordinary income rates . Non-qualified annuity distributions of basis are tax free . Annuity distributions recognize gain first and basis second or last in first out . The exception to the rule is lifetime annuitization where basis is amortized to the annuitants life expectancy as a portion of the payment until its exhausted . This special treatment is called the exclusion ratio , the part of the annuity payment excluded from taxation . All qualified annuities are fully taxable at ordinary income tax rates .
How much disability insurance is needed ? The answer is going to vary by individual . Some consider disability income sufficient if it replaces 70 % of your taxable income , since often individual disability is tax free . You might need a greater amount if your insurance is taxable income . You also may need to look at inflation protection with your plan . But honestly , what ever you can afford and keep in-force is what you should consider as a minimum . Some income is better than no income and disability coverage should not be looked at as a all or nothing choice .
Whether your employer provided disability insurance is taxable depends on who pays the premium , among some other things . If you pay the premiums for your policy with earnings that have already been taxed , your disability benefits should be tax free if/when collected . If your employer pays the policy premium and does not count that as income to you , then the disability benefits would be taxable . Whether you split premiums , use a cafeteria plan , or other factors , taxation has its own rules for each situation . But the above is the most common rule of thumb for employer provided disability insurance taxation .
Generally no . Benefits received from California 's Employment Development Department are not taxable provided they are paid solely as disability benefits . In some instances , California 's EDD will provide payment from the program in lieu of unemployment benefits ; when this happens the benefits received will be taxable . If this takes place , the department will provide the benefit recipient with appropriate tax forms to use when filing his or her income taxes .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is There An Affordable Life Insurance Policy For My 93 Year Old Dad ?
I regret to say that I personally do not know of any life insurance companies that will issue a new policy to someone past age 90 . Most affordable final expense policies have an age limit of age 80 or 85 . Now is a good time to purchase a final expense policy for yourself , if you do n't have one yet .
For a 40 year old nonsmoking male 10 year term life insurance for $ 100,000 of coverage from a few leading life insurance companies is : super preferred is $ 93 , preferred plus & preferred is $ 107 , standard plus is $ 123 , standard is $ 139 . Permanent guaranteed universal life for the same scenarios above is : super preferred is $ 198 , preferred plus & preferred is $ 224 , standard plus is $ 260 .
I 've personally written life insurance on a toddler and a 93 year old , so there is a policy available for everyone through age 100 -LRB- I do n't know of availability past 100 -RRB- . Two main considerations are the insurance company and the type of life insurance . Each company has different options .
Transamerica offers competitive life insurance products and underwriting . Transamerica is rated A + AM Best , AA - S&P , A1 Moodys & AA - Fitch . All their related companies are 93 or better with Comdex . Transamerica is a top 20 company in term and guaranteed universal life insurance .
Monumental Life Insurance Company is a sizable 31 billion asset life insurance carrier with ratings from the following rating services : A.M. Best Company -LRB- Best 's Rating , 15 ratings -RRB- A + -LRB- 2 -RRB- , Standard & Poor 's -LRB- Financial Strength , 20 ratings -RRB- AA - -LRB- 4 -RRB- , Moody 's -LRB- Financial Strength , 21 ratings -RRB- A1 -LRB- 5 -RRB- , Fitch Ratings -LRB- Financial Strength , 21 ratings -RRB- AA - -LRB- 4 -RRB- , Comdex Ranking -LRB- Percentile in Rated Companies -RRB- 93 as of July 3 , 2013 .
Here is a testimonial . I was 12 years old when my little sister died of cancer just before her second birthday . My dad bought life insurance on all 6 of us kids when we were born . This unspeakable tragedy has extended tentacles into our lives in many ways , both good and bad . But my mom said one of the few bright moments during those dark days was that they had life insurance to pay for my sister 's funeral . Had they not gotten her a policy as a newborn , chances are she may no longer have qualified -LRB- due to her cancer diagnosis -RRB- by the time they got around to it .
I 'm going to assume that you want it for the unthinkable ... Death ... not college . The TV & Radio talkers often say , `` OH ... you do n't need to have more than what you need for final expenses . '' I 'm a dad ... If one of my kids passes ... I WO N'T FUNCTION FOR 2-3 MONTHS ... I DO NOT want to profit off my kids ... . Yet not getting out of bed for months , flying my family across the country , etc. . . Look ... I 'm saying this as a DAD who happens to be in the insurance biz ... Love your kids ... Buy what you can afford and fits the underwritting guidlelines of the carrier ... .
I will answer this question as a dad . First , take the advice of one of the richest men in the world , Warren Buffet . His advice Rule 1 `` do n't lose '' . Rule 2 `` refer to rule 1 '' . So cover your ass-etts first , buy yourself some decent insurance . if a calamity befalls you , you will not be financially out of the game . Somebody will suffer the calamity . It may be you . 1 . For free life insurance advice , go to www.lfehappens.org and figure out how much you need now . Then buy it . Today . You are not bulletproof . You likely have a friend your age that has died . No second chance . 2 . Car insurance . Since the average SUV you might hit costs lots more than the minimum coverages , do n't get minimum liability coverage . If you hit someone , and have less coverage than what you hit , you may end up paying for the rest of the SUV you hit out of pocket . While I am on it , buy a car you can afford to lose . Pay cash if you can . Cars are just the cost of getting to work . By paying cash , you can save 4,000 a year or more . A nice little pile . Remember : We fly around all day in 30 year old airliners . Airlines maintain their planes meticulously . Maintain your vehicle and it will last . Fall in love with your spouse and your children , not your car . 3 . Furniture , clothes , and other things do not go up in value . Pay cash for items that do not go up in value . If you ca n't pay cash , you ca n't afford it . Goodwill is open in every city . They always have some nice things . 4 . You do not need cable or Satellite . Netflix is 1/10th the cost . Save 1000.00 a year . 5 . Pack a lunch . You can go on a nice vacation with the 2,500.00 or so you will save over the year by not buying a 10.00 lunch . 6 . Do you really need the latest cell phone and unlimited data plan ? No , I did n't think so . 7 . Little piles make big piles . Only when you have saved something can you plan for retirement . The easiest way to make a good retirement possible is to cover your losses , and spend less . Once you have saved your backside risk and saved some capital , how you allocate your funds is less important than the discipline to do it . What gets watched grows in your life . Keep track of your money , using www.mint.com or some other software , and it will grow . when you have big piles , you will by then have the knowledge of how to keep the money working . Let me say it again . Little piles make big piles . Be disciplined . Do so , and you will be comfortable in retirement . I have faith in you . - dad
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
This is a very relevant question because there is not a black-and-white answer to it . Lets suppose you have a family where mom does stay at home with the kids . Tragically , she dies . What is the best possible thing that can happen with these kids ? Really , its for dad to stay home with them . Theyve already lost mom . They are going to need their dad more than they ever have . He is THE parent . Dad may want to keep working and hire a Mary Poppins-type nanny , but that is the second best solution by far . He really should stay home from work to the greatest extent possible and just connect and bond and nurture and comfort these kids through what may be the most devastating occurrence in their life . Obviously , he will need money to be able to afford to stay home . That is what I think is the number one function of life insurance on a stay-at-home mom . This is a hard sell to insurance companies these days , because they keep thinking in terms of percentage of the wager earners coverage , and on and on . But if I get a couple who really want dad to stay home if the family does lose mom , I fight hard to get them a policy to make that happen .
My parents applied for Long Term Care Insurance many years ago , and my mother was able to qualify for it , but my father was not . My father 's declined over these many years , and toward the end , it was a worry whether my mom could continue to care for him or not . Thankfully , she was , but it was a difficult situation , to say the least . Now my mom has long term care insurance and you can tell it brings her peace . Even though she does not have anyone at home to care for her , like she did for Dad , she will have the funds to do what she needs to do if she can not care for herself . This personal experience has made it more real to me that , if you are not close to qualifying for Medicaid , you should probably have Long Term Care Insurance .
According to most sources that gather such information , the percentage of the population of the United States that owns some type of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs is around 7 % and holding . While theprobability of needing some type of extended-care for performing daily activities before death is quite high -LRB- about 1 in 4 will need up to 2 years of long-term care , slightly lower for men and higher for women -RRB- , two human factors come into play when the discussing transferring the payment of costs for such care to an insurance company : fear and denial . People are generally afraid to even consider how awful it would be to not be able to successfully perform common daily activities and need help from someone to do so . Families assume that since mom and dad took care of them as babies , they will take care of mom and dad when they need roughly the same type of attention and care . Thus , they console their elderly parents not to worry and fret about it . Others are simply in denial . `` Just take me out back and shoot me '' is a common demonstration of denial . One agent I know told me about an adult daughter that took her dad up on that . She asked , `` When should I shoot you ? '' Her father said , `` I 'll tell you when '' . So , when he started to need help getting around and the daughter offered to help , she held up a toy gun and asked , `` Now ? '' The father said , `` No , but soon . '' Of course , his condition became worse and worse until finally , he needed to be admitted to full-time care in a facility . The daughter asked again , as she had over the years , `` Do I shoot you now ? '' But , by this time , the only response her father could give was a tear . He had lost his ability to speak . Cost has become a real deterrent to the purchase of long-term care insurance . However , those that have had to go through the experience of taking care of an aged loved one usually find some way to afford at least some amount of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs . This insurance is not about the insured . It 's about the care-giver . Approximately 7 % of Americans have figured that out .
That is a great question ! Life insurance is one of those things where the younger you are when you get it , the cheaper it will be . I pay $ 5 a month for the policy that my Dad bought for me when I was a child . If I were to purchase the same policy today , I guarantee you I 'd pay a whole lot more . My practice is to advise protecting yourself and your children by purchasing a policy at as young an age as possible . Children unfortunately pass , or develop illnesses that can be devastating financial hardships , or prevent them from getting affordable insurance later in life . I hope that helps , if you 'd like more detail , please drop me a line . Thanks for asking !
Child Riders : I always offer a child rider to parents . Recently -LRB- today -RRB- I added $ 20,000 child rider a mother 's policy . It cost her a whopping $ 8.60 . Not each , but for all 4 children . So the cost per child is $ 2.15 . And if she has more children or adopts they are covered from the 15th day of life with no qualifying . No extra cost . The automatic coverage has meant the difference of being able to cover a child born with a grave illness or not . Which brings up another benefit of most child riders . Guaranteed convertibility of up 5 or 6 times the amount . In the case above when a child reaches age 25 they have the guaranteed right to convert the $ 20,000.00 rider to $ 100,000.00 Permanent plan . No medical questions , no exams , no blood work . At standard rates . That is a huge benefit . We have converted young cancer patients , a Marine in Iraq and a 25 year old that had been in a coma for years to name a few . All for $ 8.60 or $ 2.15 per child . And they can still buy individual policies on the kids . Or use the saved money to buy much more coverage on mom and dad . Individual child policies : I am also a big proponent of short paying a childs policy . Actually just about anyone under 60 that can afford the extra premium . I do not really show cash values on small policies as they take a very long time to grow and normally do not amount to much . Twenty years ago we were selling $ 5,000 Burial and Child plans . While better than nothing , the now grown children are underwhelmed with the face amount or small cash values . Today I am suggesting much larger plans . Not child plans but plans that will be worth more when they are adults and need to protect their own children . $ 50,000 , $ 100,000 or even $ 250,000 plans are not unusual and very reasonable from top rated Insurance Companies . Starting at about $ 20 . As always an experienced Life Insurance Agent is your best source of information . One that has more than one or two companies or types of insurance .
I am sorry for your loss , and pray that you find comfort during this time . You have asked a great question . I 'm going to hazard a guess and say that the policy has been in force for many years . Over that time , the amount paid into the policy has exceeded whatever the face value of the policy is , the company pays the occasional dividend , or both . In any case , the cash value has grown to exceed the stated benefit value of the policy . I have policies that are the same way ; my Dad was wise and loved us enough to buy policies for us with what at the time were adequate face values . Over the years , what I 've paid on the policy has been supplemented by dividends paid by the insurance company . The cash value is about triple the face value . But if you look at the monthly statement , I will bet you will see what I see on mine - the death benefit is equal to the face value + the excess cash value , minus any unpaid loans or owed premium . My bet is the policy is written with a company that has been fiscally prosperous , and paid steady dividends to the policy . Your loved one made a wise decision purchasing this policy . May God bless and keep you in your time of sorrow , and thank you for asking .
One of the big advantages of life insurance is that it does not have to go through probate . My father died about a year ago , and he had several small life insurance policies . My mom was truly surprised that she had quick access to those funds to pay for Dad 's funeral , without having to wait for probate -LRB- which still has not been completed , as far as I know -RRB- . And surprised again when she just found out for sure that she did not have to pay any taxes on them . No matter how much you trust your agent , it is collecting on life insurance that can make believers of anyone .
That is a great question ! It 's really one that you should ask your agent , because I 'm a little hazy on what you are wanting to do . You are n't going to be able to convert your life insurance policy into an annuity , so that part of your question is no , you wo n't convert it at all . As for the receiving of premiums , Companies pay premiums -LRB- or do n't -RRB- at their choosing . They determine the amount to be paid , if any , and usually at a set time during their fiscal year they make that payment . I believe NWML pays once a year , but I may be wrong , I 've never asked them -LRB- I have policies from them that my Dad bought way back when -RRB- I just appreciate seeing them on my yearly statement . Please contact your agent , and have them explain your policy a little better to you . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
People have life insurance for more reasons than you might think . Of course , they have life insurance so that their loved ones would have something to pay the bills for at least a while , until they can get back on their feet . They have life insurance so their kids can grow up financially stable in spite of the emotional trauma of losing a parent . They buy it for business purposes ; to tide them over if a key employee dies ; to provide money for a son to purchase the business from Dad if Dad dies ; to pay the estate taxes . Life insurance is used to fund funerals , provide collateral for loans , and save up money for the policy holder 's dreams . Those are just some of the reasons people have life insurance .
Everything mentioned above is correct . You need to also consider when selecting Life Insurance for somebody that 's older the underwriting process you 'll have to go through . Depending on the benefit amount , some companies have a nonmedical underwriting process . That means mom and dad do n't have to give a blood or urine sample . You 'll see these type of plans on TV . Yet be aware of what you 're buying . Most of the TV Brands do not have guaranteed level premiums for life , or the death benefit is n't paid in full for the first two years . Allow me to explain in more detail . These plans are often called final expense Life Insurance . Generally speaking there or two ways the benefits are paid out . If your parents or in overall good health , without a major event like a heart attack or cancer in the last two years , they should be eligible for what 's called an immediate benefit . Once the policies approved the death benefit is available the next day . The other type is called a graded benefit -LRB- or call date modified benefit in some cases -RRB- . Again , generally speaking , most of these plans have a limited payout the first two years of policy is in force . Some pay a percentage of the death benefit while others refund all your premiums plus an interest rate . These plans are great if mom and dad are in poor health . Some applications have zero medical questions . I often see where someone is sold a graded benefit when they could have received a level benefit with a different carrier . Underwriting is the key factor ! If your parents are in good health they may want to consider a fully underwritten policy . That typically includes a small medical exam . Think of it this way , the deeper the carrier looks into somebody 's health , the better their rate for the same benefit will be . Then there 's the whole question of what type of insurance to get . Whole Life -LRB- which is what the Final expense plans are -RRB- , Term , or Universal Life . The Orman 's and Ramsey 's of the world will tell you to buy nothing else than term . . ever , ever , ever ... . I 'm not going to debate that now . Just going to say they are hurting a lot of people with such narrow , cookie cutter advice . ALL life insurance types have a time & place . If you have further questions ... Reach out . Honored to help ... - gravy .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Much More Is Health Insurance For Smokers ?
Starting in 2014 , insurance companies can charge you up to 50 % more for premiums than someone who does n't use tobacco . However it is not a given that because the federal government allows this rate band that it will effect you.For Instancehere in New Jersey health insurers will not be allowed to vary health insurance premiums based on smoking status . Bottom line is that premiums can not vary by morethan50 % because of smoking status and that the final decision on whether smoking status will effect premiums is left to be decided on the state level .
Since life insurance rates will depend on several factors such as face amount , type of policy , your overall health and insurability profile , etc , the real question is how much MORE does life insurance cost for a smoker . Most companies differentiate between different types of tobacco use . An occasional cigar smoker may get a better rate than a cigarette smoker . A cigarette smoker could expect to pay 30 % to 50 % more in premiums depending on their age than a non-tabacco user .
The cost of life insurance for a smoker varies with age , gender and build , just as it does for life insurance for a nonsmoker . However , when you throw in a health condition , being a smoker can increase premiums much more than it does for a nonsmoker . Smoking while having diabetes , heart disease , COPD , even osteoporosis , can cause rates to jump exponentially , or even be declined . One way to get around this can be to purchase a simplified issue life insurance policy . Their smoker rates tend to not have quite as large a variation as medically underwritten policies , and they may not be as strict about the impact of smoking upon that health condition . There are also medically underwritten policies that treat smokers much better than others . Contact an agency that specializes in smoker life insurance to get your most competitive rate .
Yes , indeed they do . And the test is pretty reliable . Want to hear an interesting story ? A number of years ago I took an application from a client who disclosed that he did smoke cigarettes on a daily basis . So I quoted him smoker rates . He provided the lab specimens for the insurance exam and we all assumed they would show he was indeed a smoker . When the results came back , he had tested negative for nicotine even though he smoked every day ! Our assumption was he had a huge tolerance and it just didnt register in the lab . So , fair being fair , the underwriter gave him non-smoker rates ! And he paid about half as much as he would have as a smoker . Of course , smokers cant count on that always happening . They should expect to pay smoker rates . And most smokers hate paying that extra premium for that extra mortality risk . -LRB- And by the way - there is a huge amount of data to show that smoking does increase your mortality risk . Sorry . -RRB- So what should a smoker do ? Lie on the application ? I mean , who is really going to know if you say you dont smoke , and just go without cigarettes for a few weeks ? Your lab specimen should then come out clean , right ? Bad idea . Not good . Dont do it . That is insurance fraud , you know . You could jeopardize the claim getting paid . Besides which , this is not a game . Life insurance pricing has to accurately reflect the risk obligations taken on . If everybody scammed the system to get undercharged , then odds are the insurance carriers wouldnt have enough money to pay out benefit . Then everybodys beneficiaries would lose out . Not only that : there is something to be said for acting honorably , dont you think ? Your word should be your bond . What about postponing the purchase of the policy and waiting a year or two , so you can quit in the meantime and then qualify for non-smoker rates ? Well , okay , but who says youll be insurable at that point ? What if you come down with high blood pressure , high cholesterol , or high blood sugar , or any number of things that could throw the rates off ? Or even worse , make you ineligible for coverage at all ? Delaying is not worth the risk . Best thing to do is buy the policy now for the best smoker rates available . Keep it in force . Then , stop smoking . If you qualify for non-smoker rates , go for it . If you are eligible for a better rate , then good for you . But if you are not , then at least you have coverage . Either way , your beneficiaries will get what they need . Good move .
A quote , in short , is an estimation of premium you can expect to pay for your life insurance policy - the premiums can be paid annually , semi-annually , quarterly , or monthly . Please note , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . There are 4 main factors that determine the premium for the coverage - your age , the amount of coverage you 're trying to secure , how long you want it guaranteed for , and your risk classification . The risk classification is the MOST important factor in determining how much you can expect to/will pay for your coverage . If the medical history is not factored into the quote -LRB- e.g. you 're only running numbers based on someone 's date of birth and/or height/weight -RRB- , any quotes provided are pretty much meaningless because they do not provide an accurate representation of what you can expect to be approved at . To provide a little background on risk classes : every life insurance company has different underwriting guidelines that determine what risk class an individual qualifies for . The company will look at your personal medical history , smoker status , height/weight profile , results of the medical exam -LRB- if applying for a policy requiring it - no exam policies typically cost more -RRB- , your family medical history -LRB- e.g. cancer or heart disease before age 60 in the immediate family -RRB- , motor vehicle record , and any hazardous activities you may participate in -LRB- such as aviation , scuba diving , drag racing , etc -RRB- . Since every company has different guidelines for qualification , one might offer a better risk class than another based on the aforementioned information , resulting in a lower premium for the same coverage . The different risk classes someone can be assigned by a carrier are : Preferred Plus -LRB- sometimes seen as Preferred Elite -RRB- this means the proposed insured is typically in superior health , normal height/weight profile , no chronic illnesses , lab results within normal range , no immediate family members died from heart disease or cancer before age 60 . Preferred this means the proposed insured is in excellent health . Height/weight may be a little over the most preferred range , treatment for high blood pressure or high cholesterol usually acceptable , lab results normal or slightly abnormal . Standard Plus - this means the proposed insured 's health is better than the average . Height/weight may be higher than normal . Standard - this means the proposed insured is in average health and has a normal life expectancy . Height/weight may be on the high side , possible treatment for several minor conditions , one or more parents died from heart disease/cancer before age 60 , slightly elevated lab results -LRB- such as higher than normal blood pressure or cholesterol -RRB- . Substandard - this means the proposed insured has a below average life expectancy -LRB- commonly seen as high risk life insurance -RRB- . Height/weight may be considered obese , treatment for chronic illnesses or major health conditions -LRB- such as prior heart attack , cancer , diabetes -RRB- , abnormal lab results . Substandard ratings are expressed as a table rating , usually designated as Tables A-J or 1-10 . Each additional table increase is usually a 25 % increase over the standard risk class rates . Tobacco user risk classes are preferred smoker , standard smoker , and substandard smoker . There is no preferred plus or standard plus risk classification for tobacco users . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your case among multiple carriers to see who will offer you the most favorable risk classification for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Unfortunately , that is too broad a question to give a specific answer . I can however , point you in the right direction . Smoking status is just one factor in assessing risks and setting rates . Smokers usually will pay more than non-smokers . The reason for the word usually , as opposed to definitely , is that in Canada some companies approach smoking differently . In other words , they charge smokers different rates based on what and how much they smoke . For example , cigar smokers are generally permitted to smoke 1 cigar a month with many companies to still be considered `` non-smokers '' for insurance purposes . I suspect it is for purely competitive reasons for cigar-smoking golfers . However , a more realistic approach is allowing 50 cigars a year which some companies take . I suggest that you look at the online quoting services to get an idea and then work with a local independent agent / broker to get the right policy at the right price . It is very important that you are truthful when declaring your smoking status as the company can deny your claim if you are not . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
If you smoke cigarettes , Life Insurance rates run approximate three times what they would be for a nonsmoker . With very competitive smoker rates , the difference is not quite as much ; with a health condition combined with smoking , the difference in premiums could be much higher . Smoking an occasional cigar does not have much effect on rates at all , however . And even a daily cigar can qualify for nonsmoker rates with a few companies . Unfortunately , there is no break for those who are social cigarette smokers except that can be rated Preferred Smoker if their other health and risk factors are Preferred .
This will depend on a number of factors , but for a given age , gender , and risk class - the premiums for a smoker will be roughly about 50 % more than non-smoker rates -LRB- can be higher , varies by carrier -RRB- . Some carriers may offer non-smoker rates to tobacco users depending on the type of tobacco and frequency of usage . The types of tobacco that carriers may consider for non-smoker rates are cigars , pipe smokers , and chewing tobacco - if you 're using cigarettes , you 're going to get smoker rates . To get a realistic projection of cost , you will want to review your height/weight and medical history with an independent agent to identify the risk class you 're most likely to qualify for -LRB- this determines the premiums for the program -RRB- , the age of the proposed insured -LRB- PI -RRB- , whether you 're male or female , a tobacco user or not , amount of coverage you want to secure/need , and how long you want to have the coverage in place for .
A quote , in short , is an estimation of premium you can expect to pay for your life insurance policy - the premiums can be paid annually , semi-annually , quarterly , or monthly . Please note , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . There are 4 main factors that determine the premium for the coverage - your age , the amount of coverage you 're trying to secure , how long you want it guaranteed for , and your risk classification . The risk classification is the MOST important factor in determining how much you can expect to/will pay for your coverage . If the medical history is not factored into the quote -LRB- e.g. you 're only running numbers based on someone 's date of birth and/or height/weight -RRB- , any quotes provided are pretty much meaningless because they do not provide an accurate representation of what you can expect to be approved at . To provide a little background on risk classes : every life insurance company has different underwriting guidelines that determine what risk class an individual qualifies for . Since every company has different guidelines for qualification , one might offer a better risk class than another based on the aforementioned information , resulting in a lower premium for the same coverage . The different risk classes someone can be assigned by a carrier are : Preferred Plus -LRB- sometimes seen as Preferred Elite -RRB- this means the proposed insured is typically in superior health , normal height/weight profile , no chronic illnesses , lab results within normal range , no immediate family members died from heart disease or cancer before age 60 . Preferred this means the proposed insured is in excellent health . Height/weight may be a little over the most preferred range , treatment for high blood pressure or high cholesterol usually acceptable , lab results normal or slightly abnormal . Standard Plus - this means the proposed insured 's health is better than the average . Height/weight may be higher than normal . Standard - this means the proposed insured is in average health and has a normal life expectancy . Height/weight may be on the high side , possible treatment for several minor conditions , one or more parents died from heart disease/cancer before age 60 , slightly elevated lab results -LRB- such as higher than normal blood pressure or cholesterol -RRB- . Substandard - this means the proposed insured has a below average life expectancy -LRB- commonly seen as high risk life insurance -RRB- . Height/weight may be considered obese , treatment for chronic illnesses or major health conditions -LRB- such as prior heart attack , cancer , diabetes -RRB- , abnormal lab results . Substandard ratings are expressed as a table rating , usually designated as Tables A-J or 1-10 . Each additional table increase is usually a 25 % increase over the standard risk class rates . Tobacco user risk classes are preferred smoker , standard smoker , and substandard smoker . There is no preferred plus or standard plus risk classification for tobacco users . It 's best to consult with an experienced life insurance broker who can shop your case among multiple carriers to see who will offer you the most favorable risk classification for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Great question . Smokers usally pay more on life insurance about % 20 - % 50 more . Keep in mind not all companies have the same rates . Some companies charge more for smokers and some companies have good rates for that type of class . They will also ask how many do you smoke a day the less per day you migh get a preferred smoker rate .
Usually , most policies require a quick medical exam , which includes a urine sample . And they will test for pot . The good news is that most companies will not decline you coverage . They will just consider you a `` Smoker '' and give you smoker rates . But , currently , I know of 3 companies that offer `` Non-Smoker '' rates to pot smokers . Aviva is the most relaxed about it . And will allow up to a `` Preferred '' non-smoker rating for using 2 times per week or less . Lincoln National is next and will give Standard Non-Smoker ratings to people who smoke 2 times per week or less . MetLife allows for 1 time per week and will offer a Standard nonsmoker rating . Prudential allows for 2 times per month , and offers a Standard nonsmoker rating . Long story short if you smoke Pot , Aviva or Lincoln National will be your best bets . And this list is as of 3/2013 , it could easily change .
The short answer : Much more expensive than if you did n't ! Rates for smokers tend to be twice -LRB- or more -RRB- as expensive as rates for non-smokers . Some life insurance companies are better suited to smokers than others , so keep this in mind if you are shopping for a policy . An independent agent who has access to a wide variety of carriers can find you the best rates for your particular situation .
Insurance companies tend to assign policyholders into a risk group - high risk , low risk , average risk , etc. . Life insurance companies really have only two risk classes : standard and preferred . Within these classes you can have subclasses : standard smoker . Standard non-smoker . Preferred smoker . Preferred non-smoker . And you can have preferred best and standard best subclasses as well . Table ratings are typically assessed on top of the standard underwriting class . The rating means that you basically are considered a standard risk , but due to one or more other factors , your risk is higher than the average standard risk . Insurance companies vary in how they weigh each table , but typically , each table represents a 25 % increase in price over standard . So , if your standard premium is $ 1000 per year , a table A rating would make that premium $ 1250 . A table B rating would make that premium $ 1500 . And so on . I have seen carriers assist table ratings for all types of reasons . These include a high PSA ; history of heart attack ; build ; alcohol history ; driving record ; mountain climbing ; prior drug use ; cancer history ; scuba diving ; aviation ; foreign travel . Basically , you could take a look at every one of the questions on your insurance application , and depending on your answer , an insurance carrier may want to assess extra premium . On the overall , I think that system works in favor of the consumer . You are still able to get coverage . The system is much better than a black or white , take-you-or - leave - you set up . In addition , I think that by and large these extra premiums are assessed fairly . Obviously , the broker needs to hook you up with the carrier that will most aggressively apply its underwriting guidelines in your case . One carrier may only assess a table B , but another one might be a table G ! Still another one might decline you altogether . Your broker needs to be your guide in fending your way through the life insurance carrier jungle out there :-RRB- One other important note here : carriers sometimes have sales on policies through what are called table shaving discounts . This means that for certain types of cases , for a set period of time only , they will make an offer of standard to somebody who normally would be assessed a table rating . They usually cap it at table D or so . And they usually limit it to only permanent insurance such as universal life . Sales like this can give consumers really good bargains . Basically , you could buy a permanent product for a lower cost than a term product simply because the underwriting concessions wouldnt be available on the term product . I would also like to add that carriers typically go up to table L or so . When I have a client who represents a very high risk due to a serious medical condition or dangerous hobby , I like to see how high I can get a carrier to go with a table rating . I mean , if somebody really needs the coverage and has the money to pay for it , why not put hit with the premium to make it worth your while ? Its fun to see how hungry carriers can be for somebodys business :-RRB- .
Smokers are considered a health risk and unfortunately will always pay a higher premium . The serious health conditions that are associated with smoking means smokers have a shorter life expectancy . If one is a smoker the best course of action would be to seek some type of smoking cessation program . One small word of advice ; if your option is the electronic cigarette this will show up in the para-meds as nicotine usage . In some cases it will afford you a lower premium however your rating class with most insurance companies will be listed as smoker .
There are a lot of factors that go into the price of life insurance . Every year that you get older , the price increases for insurance . It also depends on how much life insurance you are looking for . The higher the death benefit , the higher the monthly premium . Another factor to consider is your health . Life insurance is based on the insurance companys risk . If you are unhealthy or have a few high risk health conditions , you will have to pay a higher rate for insurance . It is also up to the insurance company . Some insurance companies charge more for the exact same coverage . Also , women have a longer life expectancy then men so the rates for women are usually lower . There are two types of life insurance too . Term insurance only covers you for a period of time and whole life covers you for a lifetime and you are guaranteed a payout . Term is usually cheaper because if you dont pass in the specified term , the insurance company does not pay out anything . For policies that have a large death benefit , the insurance company usually asks for an exam to be done that checks your blood , heart rate , and other key health related factors . The rate is usually higher for smokers compared to non-smokers . Life insurance rates are determined on a case by case basis .
The price of life insurance for a 40 year old depends on the health , tobacco use , weight , and gender of the applicant , in addition to how much life insurance is purchased and what type of policy is bought . Short term policies cost much less than permanent policies . Policies for smokers usually cost at least double the rate of policies for nonsmokers . Coverage for those with serious health conditions can cost 10 times or more of the premium for a 40 year old with perfect health . To get an estimate of a life insurance quote for a 40 year old with your characteristics , you can run a quote on an website advertising `` instant life insurance quotes '' . You can input different amounts and different types of policies to see how rates differ for different scenarios .
Yes , indeed . Here is a sure fire way to get denied life insurance for smoking pot : Smoke it . Dont disclose this on your application . Then test positive on your insurance exam for marijuana . You will notice that the key to your downfall here is not disclosing it on your application . Trying to pull a fast one on the underwriter is a great way to get denied . And by the way : dont think about not disclosing it on your application , and then waiting a long time so it wont show up in your lab specimen . Thats insurance fraud . Not a good way to start a relationship with a life insurance carrier . Now you are going to ask , What if I do disclose it ? Will I get accepted ? Not only might you get accepted , but if you apply with the right company , you could get approved at preferred non-smoker rates ! How do you like that ? It all depends on the amount and frequency used . And you have to apply with a company who has very lenient underwriting guidelines for pot smokers . Some do ; a lot dont . But there is more to the story here . If you smoke cigarettes as well as pot , you will end up with a smoker rating . Dont forget that . Another item : many people smoke marijuana as a form of self-medication . They have trouble sleeping , so they smoke pot . They feel anxious , so they smoke pot . They feel a little depressed , so they smoke pot . If you have a history of dealing with these issues , then the underwriter will look a bit more closely at your marijuana use . If it appears that you do have medical concerns that are not being addressed adequately with medical treatment , he may not be confident that your pot smoking is purely recreational . That may affect his willingness to make an offer , and if he does so , at a low rate . By the way : I have helped people get policies who intake marijuana through a vaporizer , as opposed to smoking it . That can add an additional complication to underwriting . Some underwriters feel that is a more intense form of ingestion and has a more severe impact on your body . Something else for you to think about : any brushes with the law in relation to your marijuana use must be disclosed on your application . Remember that your legal record is part and parcel of the underwriting process . Lots to think about here , Makes you want to light up , doesnt it ?
There are several ways that a life insurance company can know or learn that you smoke -LRB- what you smoke was not specified but we 'll go for tobacco on this one -RRB- . 1 -RRB- Self Reporting - they ask you on your application if you are a tobacco user and , depending upon the value of the policy being applied for , may ask for fairly detailed information on your type and frequency of tobacco usage . So , to honestly complete the initial application the applicant themselves should be the person informing the insurance carrier about their tobacco use status . 2 -RRB- Physical Exam - as a condition of your application you may be required to get a basic physical examination where things like height & weight can be verified and where , quite often , blood and/or urine samples are also taken to screen for health issues and to detect drugs such as Nicotine in the applicant 's system . 3 -RRB- Electronic Medical Records - most life insurance carriers will check your application 's answers against information about you in the Medical Information Bureau . An indicated history of tobacco use when none is reported on the person 's application would be an underwriting red flag . Also , information about whether you have been issued life insurance as a smoker , declined or rated as a smoker on a life insurance application can also turn up . 4 -RRB- Leg Work - few of us will have this problem , but if you are applying for a really large amount of life insurance the insurance carriers may actually conduct investigations into an applicant 's background and medical history . These may include interviews with friends and family . So , if they figure out you are really a Mafia boss rather than the president of the local trash company , your application for $ 50 million in coverage may get turned down . To take out a life insurance policy as a non-smoker when you really are a smoker would be an act of fraud -LRB- a misrepresentation on the applicant 's part -RRB- . And even if you were to get issued at a non-smoker 's rates that does n't mean you are home free . Life insurance policies standardly have a two year contestability provision in them where the insurance company can terminate or adjust the policy if it can prove that you made any false statements on your application . But , if your misrepresentation about your tobacco use is determined to meet the legal requirements of fraud -LRB- pretty good chance they will -RRB- then the contestability period is indefinite .
Fully underwritten life insurance policies require you to declare whether or not you use any tobacco products . Although cigars and pipes are smoked , the question seems to suggest cigarettes . Cigarette smoking shortens life expectancy , so smokers pay more for life insurance . If smoking is declared on the application and the life insurance company offers an underwriting decision after the due diligence process , a death claim will be paid . If the insured takes up smoking after the policy has been issued as a nonsmoker , the life insurance company will pay the claim . It is the circumvention of truth that may indeed be classified as fraud that could void the policy in certain states or reduce the death benefit based on smoker rates at the date of issue . Some occasional smokers attempt to beat the urine analysis detection of cotinine , the byproduct of nicotine , by not smoking 8-10 days before the exam banking on their body chemistry to purge the continine from their systems . But you would have to lie on the application . And again , lying on the application could be considered fraud in some states . My advice : There is one life insurance company that offers nonsmoking rates to smokers for three years in an attempt to give the insured time to quit smoking . We can help with that . But bottom line : do n't try to game the system .
Yes , usually testing during the life insurance underwriting process will include testing for `` pot '' . While it may not mean a decline of the offer of insurance , it will change the price offered in many cases . Many `` pot '' smokers do not smoke cigarettes , some insurance carriers consider `` pot '' smokers to still be smokers and adjust the premium upward . As we move into a time where many states are legalizing `` pot '' expect some changes in how `` pot '' is considered , but it may take a long time before this happens .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Do I Need Medicare If I Have Health Insurance ?
If you have current health insurance provided by your employer , and it is a comprehensive plan covering office visits , prescriptions and major medical , you should continue on that plan , assuming that rates are low or the employer is paying the premium . If you are age 65 or older , and are covered under a group plan at work , you will still be eligible for an Open Enrollment for a Medicare Supplement plan when you lose your existing coverage . It will be best to utilize an experienced broker and/or a reputable national website when you are in that situation . There will be many plan options available .
Video Transcript : Hello , everyone . I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show `` Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of the Game . '' I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com , and I got this question . It says , `` Is there a limit on how much life insurance I can purchase ? '' Well , let 's say I 'm going to purchase it on myself , and I need to be able to use financial justification . Financial justification simply means that I have to be able to verify and validate the reason I have coverage . And if I have huge income and I have a massive amount of assets and I 'm looking at a future date on which I think I will die based on my life expectancy , then I can go all the way up to those limits . Sooner or later , I 'm going to hit a limit because I will not be able to justify it . So , can you buy it on as much as you want ? The answer is no . You have to always base your thinking on what do I need to cover all my liabilities , my taxes , and transfer issues at death , and when do I think I 'm going to die . Those are the numbers I 'm looking for at whatever inflation rate of return that I use as my reference point . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any questions , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Medicare has two options : 1 . origninal medicare & 2 . Medicare advantage . Original medicare is administered by the same beaurcrats that Obama has used to trash the health care system whereas Medicare Advantage is administered by PRIVATE insurance companies . Medicare Advantage has proven to be the most cost effective system of rendering medicare services because the insurance companies know what is appropriate and what is not appropriate . Medicare on the other hand continues to be riddled with Waste , Fraud , & Abuse-which can be summaraized by spelling P O L I T IC I A N S always looking for an opportunity to buy votes . As a matter of fact one of the L I E S CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services -RRB- has put in the Medicare Advantage booklets is `` every Medicare Advantage plan has to be the equivalent of `` original Medicare '' . Really ? I will promise you original medicare covers 80 % of LAB work , especially when it is done for annual physical . Yet , when a particular Medicare Advantage Plan refused to pay my lab charges it was an exercise in futility to get CMS to correct the problem . The Bureaucrats created two classes of sales people when Medicare Advantage was created and adminstered by the wonderful beaucrats - one class that is completely unregulated when they sell Medicare Supplement and the sales person that sells Medicare Advantage is CONTROLLED by the beaurcrats and this last year when I completed the REQUIRED CERTIFICATION it took me 24 hous just to complete the certification . Compare that to the fact I read and took the test and passed the test to sell Obummer Care in less than three hours . Controlling Health Insurance is all about CONTROLLING YOU-THE CONSUMER . Did you realize Medicare is controlled by a UNION IN wASHINGTON D. C . If you want effective health insurance you will identify the members of the unions and you will vote for politicians that will put the unions out of business .
Video Transcript : Hello everyone , I 'm Steve Savant , syndicated financial columnist and host of the weekly online talk show Steve Savant 's Money : The Name of The Game . I 'm answering questions from insurancelibrary.com and today 's question is : is a non qualified plan better than a qualified plan ? Well , there 's two issues why you should be using a qualified plan , like an example , 401K . You 're in a high tax bracket or your employer actually is matching your contribution in some way which I think is a great way to go . If I have a high tax bracket and my employer is doing a match and I have both of those , I think that 's a really good play . Qualified plans are the way to go . I get the deduction and my employer is actually contributing . But if I do n't have either one of those two , then really the deduction does me no good . I like the life insurance idea because I do n't have the same ERISA issues like 59 and a half and I have penalty if I took out my money . So I like the life insurance side of that issue from a non qualified point of view because it accumulates tax deferred and if it 's set up correctly , it could come out tax free . Well , that 's our consumer question for today . If you have any question , just submit them to www.insurancelibrary.com .
what is the purpose of whole life insurance ? Whole life insurance has many purposes for many people . They do n't even have to have the same needs . I can speak as to why I own whole life , I own Whole life because I wanted my life insurance to be inforce when I die . I wanted a safety net for my other investment activities . I wanted control of my policy . I wanted something that will not go backward , once the money is there , it is there . I wanted not to have to buy life insurance later in life as the price no matter what type of policy goes higher . I wanted something that would not end , until I do . Those are just a few of the purposes behind my decision 25 years ago to buy whole life , and I forgot to mention I wanted a locked in premium .
Having been in this business for more than 30 years I have seen many agents come and go . There are , unfortunately , agents who are self centered and just interest in a sale . Check out the agent . Is he or she new in the business ? Sometimes those agents do not have the experience in life to understand what they are selling . Are they independent or do they work for a company as a captive agent ? Sometimes captive agents are being pressured by their sale managers to make a sale regardless of the clients needs especially when they are new . Are they local ? Is there home phone listed on their business card ? Some agents are sent in by a company from out of town . They may have an office phone number listed but no cell or home making it impossible to reach them if you need them of hours . I believe in being accessible to my clients . How pushy are they to make the sale THAT day ? While buying insurance is important , if you are not comfortable with the agent do n't let them pressure you . If they are truly caring then they will allow you time to make a decision and will be ready to answer any concerns about why you ca n't make a decision . Just be honest though . If you have a concern , tell the agent . Do n't just give him a put off . Do they ask questions to help determine what your needs are or are they just peddling policies ? A policy peddler is easy to spot . Not that these answers necessarily disqualifies them about how much they care , it is just some factors to weigh when evaluating your agent . . In my practice we try to help a person determine their needs and what they are trying to do . I look at affordability , family situation , debts , and other factors . I try to help solve problems . I go over the solutions and let the client make the decision , I do not try to twist arms to make a sale . When I make a new client I keep in touch and let them know I care and that if they need me I am there to help them . My clients can always reach me with questions . An agent who is trying to make a commission and does not care about his clients can be easily be recognized by his actions and demeanor and his willingness to work with you .
Medicare Advantage -LRB- MA -RRB- are good plans if you are in good health and not using a lot of medical services . In Alabama where I practice MA Plans have high out of pocket cost for people with serious or chronic health problems , as much as $ 6700 in a calendar year . The problem I see with MA Plans is that people start out using them when they are in good health but once your health changes and you have to use your MA Plan more and more you become unhappy with your out of pocket cost for Medicare covered services . If you become unhappy with your MA Plan and want to switch to a Medicare Supplement you may not be able to if you have serious health problems or you may pay a much higher premium because of your health . My professional recommendation is to get a Medicare Supplement even if you are in good health because you need a Medicare Health Plan that not only meets your needs today but will continue to meet your needs as you get older and your health care needs change . If you wait until you need a Medicare Supplement because your health has changed you may not be able to . Insurance companies that offer Medicare Supplement Plans can and do turn down people that have serious pre-existing health conditions .
I have a bit of a different opinion about this . I believe most agents fail because they are n't trained correctly . I 've been doing this since 1991 and explored many company 's training programs . In that time , I have n't seen them change . Do you think the market has ? Insurance companies spend thousands of hours and millions of dollars training their agents on products , business plans , and sales skills . I 've consulted with new agents from some of the biggest companies in the country that were on the verge of failure . They did exactly what they were trained to do and they were failing miserably . These are some bright , knowledgeable sales professionals . You know what their companies told them to do ? Buy leads and call them , buy more leads and call them . If that does n't work , you 're not calling enough . Can you believe it ? When you find something that 's not working enough , do it more . I believe that the reason agents fail is that they are n't good prospectors . They 've never been trained in how to prospect or market themselves or their business . Try this , go to 10 agents , any age , any experience , and ask them what their biggest challenge is . I 've asked a lot more than that and I can tell you what the overwhelming answer is : `` I do n't have enough prospects to sell to '' . It 's the same with everyone . If you find someone who says they have enough or too many , they 're service providers , not agents . I watch really smart , professional salespeople struggle at the same time I look at a guy who looks awful , sounds worse , and does n't know anything about insurance succeed almost effortlessly . You know the difference ? That last guy knows how to talk to people . Watch him , he 's always talking to people and he actually listens to them and cares . Bottom line , the best prospectors are the most successful agents . As an industry , we have to begin training prospectors , not salespeople . We have to show new agents how to connect with more people and market themselves . We should spend more time training people on how to find new prospects than we do on how to sell to the prospects they do n't have . I believe there 's a shift coming from price driven , transactional selling back to a relationship based insurance practice . If we treat our products and services as a commodity , so will the consumer . So , let 's take the first step and change the way we train new agents . Let 's first find agents motivated by the profession , not the money -LRB- not that the money 's bad -RRB- . Then , let 's train them on finding good prospects . As I see it , that 's the future of our profession and the companies and agencies that start doing this will be on the front of that wave while the rest try to figure out why their 50 year old training program is n't working .
Great question ! To make it really simple , think of four things : What do I want it to do ? How long do I want it to last ? How healthy am I ? How much can I safely afford to spend ? The answers to those four questions will give you a better idea of what to look for when shopping for your policy . For example : your answer to the first question is '' I want it only to cover my funeral expenses '' . The answer to the second : '' I 'm 70 , so until I need it . '' And the third : `` I have some fairly serious health issues '' . and the fourth : `` I only have a small amount I can spend '' . Now when you approach an agent you can better match a policy to what your needs are . Find a good agent that will help you find a policy that matches your need and budget . If you would like more information , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
This really is n't an insurance question as a political one . I can only offer my opinion and it may not be agreeable to some depending on where you live . Do I think gun owners should carry liability insurance by mandate ? Yes , I do . And I will tell you why . Accidents happen . Guns get discharged accidently , hunters and hikers are accidently shot every year . What happens when the person who has been shot , but not killed ? Who pays their bills ? Who covers the cost of their care ? Should the person responsible be able to say , sorry I have no insurance , too bad for you . Someone already cited `` part '' of the 2nd amendment in a post . Let me add the other part , '' A well regulated Militia '' . I am a well regulated insurance agent , which means I am licensed for insurance sales and required to carry `` E&O -LRB- errors and omissions -RRB- insurance '' to protect the consumer . If by accident I were to cause harm , there would be coverage to help them . It 's an expense to me as I pay for this coverage . I do n't mind that much because if for some reason , by accident I created a harmful situation I would want to provide more than an I 'm sorry .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
When Is It Too Late To Get Long Term Care Insurance ?
Its too late to get long term care insurance once you 've registered in a nursing home care facility . Its too late to get long term care insurance once you 've had a major medical event that has health or lifestyle impact that causes you to be uninsurable . Its too late to get long term care insurance past a certain age because the cost is prohibitive .
Some long term care insurance carriers will issue policies to individuals almost without regard to age ... as long as you are healthy enough to qualify with medical underwriting . Carriers will evaluate your current physical and mental health as well as your family history in determining if you meet their criteria for issuing a policy .
Its too late to get long term care insurance once you 've registered in a nursing home care facility . Its too late to get long term care insurance once you 've had a major medical event that has health or lifestyle impact that causes you to be uninsurable . Its too late to get long term care insurance past a certain age because the cost is prohibitive .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance , if it fits and one can medically qualify for it . She is currently taking care of her 90-year old mother who refused to letSuze buy long-term care insurance on her when she could have qualified for it . Of course , Suze has the means to keep her mother at home to the tune of about $ 25,000 / month . That 's what 24/7 skilled nursing care costs at this point in time . A facility would cost less , but mom naturally wants to stay home as long as possible . Suze is fortunate to have the means to have that happen . Ironically , Suze waited too long to apply for her own long-term care insurance . In waiting , she developed some type of medical condition that precluded her from qualifying for coverage when she did apply . In virtually all of her commentary on planning for retirement , Suze mentions the need to at least explore the financial prudence of applying for some amount of long-term care insurance . Long-term care insurance is not for everyone . But , everyone should have a plan for being taken care of during late life and insurance might be part of that plan .
No these are two totally separate types of insurance plans used to cover totally different needs . Disability insurance can be either long term or short term . Long term disability is used to replace your income for the rest of your working life . It usually has a bit longer elimination period 90-180-360 days before benefits begin to pay . The benefits can pay as long as age 67 when social security benefits start . A short term disability insurance plan pays benefits sooner within days , but only lasts a few months or up to a couple of years . Both disability insurance plans are insuring most peoples most valuable asset , their ability to earn a living . Disability insurance should be purchased when a person starts working for a living . Long term care insurance is meant to cover a person that can no longer care for themselves . The person needs home health care , assisted living or a nursing home . Usually the time to purchase a long term care policy is when a person gets older , typically in their 50s or 60s , but some wait until their 70s . It really depends more upon their health and lifestyle . Just do n't wait until you have been diagnosed with an affliction , then is too late .
Long Term Care Insurance is needed now more than ever . The trend I am seeing is that more companies are coming out with policies that are life insurance based which have a long term care rider attached . One problem with long term care is that people do not realize that they need it until it is too late and they can no longer afford it or qualify for it because of their health . While fewer companies are offering Long Term Care in the traditional sense , Long Term Care Insurance is not going to go away .
That is a great question ! It is possible , but I will not mislead you , it will be difficult . The majority of insurers will cap policy writing at 80-85 ; so you will need a good independent agent who can search multiple companies for you to find one that will write at his age . The second hurdle will be his health . It would be very difficult to find a company that will write if he is in a nursing home , receiving home health care , or has had any major health issues within the past couple of years . Many will decline if he 's wheelchairbound . Again , you will need a good agent that can seek out the company that will write for you . The last hurdle will be the cost . Even if you can find the company that will write his policy , it is very likely that it will be too costly to afford . I 'd hazard a guess that it would be in the hundreds of dollars a month price range , unless his health is excellent . Life insurance is one of those things where the earlier you buy it , the cheaper it is , and it hurts me to say that far too many people either through their fault or not , end up waiting far too late to buy it . Far too many wait until there has been a scare , and then it is too late , either due to health or financial concerns . You may be able to find a policy , look for an independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a specific brand name -RRB- and have them go through your options . It is my prayer for you that you can find one that fits . If you have further questions , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thank you for asking !
The age limit for buying Long Term Care is usually 84 years old . For your information , the average age that people buy Long Term Care is 57 . It 's obviously more affordable to buy it when you 're younger , but if you 're younger than 84 , it 's not too late ! If you are older and the price is an issue , get as much as you can comfortably afford because most long term care claims occur in your own home , not in a nursing home . Therefore , the amount of cover you need may not be $ 150 - $ 200/day ... it may only be $ 80 or $ 100/day . So my advice is : get as much as you can comfortably afford and continue to pay for .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance to their clients around age 50 . But the purchasing trend of long term care appears to be around age 60 . However , if youre family has a predisposition to disease , chronic hospitalization or nursing home confinement when theyre old , you may want to consider long term care insurance when youre young and healthy . You should purchase long term care for your retirement years . The statistics are significant that youll experience a need for assisted living or perhaps nursing home confinement . The average married couple spends $ 250,000 on medical and extended care during their retirement years . Securing long term care is important , especially when youre healthy and heading into your late fifties , early sixties .
As a practical matter , it is too late to obtain individual life insurance when you are uninsurable or age 85 , whichever comes first . There are a couple of insurers with rates between ages 86 and 90 but the premiums are not economical . There are ways to find life insurance protection for final expense purposes without proving one is insurable but the death benefit is reduced in the first two years and the premiums are quite high . So , we have solutions such that it is never really too late but it will come down to a combination of insurability , outlay , benefit terms and age .
Actually , long term disability insurance and long term care insurance are not the same type of policy nor do they cover the same things . Disability insurance is to replace a percentage of your income when you have an illness or injury so severe you can no longer work . Long term care insurance is primarily for your aging years to cover home health , assisted living and nursing homes when you are no longer able to take care of yourself . Long term disability insurance should be purchased at a young age as soon as you go to work earning a wage . Long term care insurance should be purchased between your late 50s or early 60s .
As a retirement planning specialist , I spend alot of time doing long term care planning . Why would I do this ? Because NOTHING will derail a person 's life-time savings faster than a custodial -LRB- AKA long term care -RRB- claim . There are two reasons why a person should purchase LTC ; the first is that they care about the quality of care , and having a say in where care will be provided , should they require it . The second reason is that they care about protecting the assets that they have acquired over the course of their life-time , and they want to protect those assets for their healthy spouse and/or children , rather then have those assets eaten up by impairment , or having them signed over to medicaid or a nursing home . As far as WHEN a person should purchase coverage ; my youngest clients are usually in their 40 's , and with them I usually recommend a hybrid life insurance-LTC product ; my average clients are in their mid 50 's to late 60 's , and for them I recommend either traditional long term care or a single premium policy with refund provisions , and my oldest clients are in their mid 70 's . I think the best time to purchase for most people is in their mid to late 50 's , because most will get better underwriting and a favorable premium . I hope this helps .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
When purchasing life insurance it is always best , in my opinion , to sit down with a good experienced reputable agent and discuss your needs . There are a variety of products . While price is a consideration it should never be the deciding factor . If a product seems a lot cheaper than other like products there is a reason that you probably will not know about until it is too late . Consider these factors : What is the purpose of the insurance ? Is it to cover a long term need such as final expenses , or a short term need such as a mortgage ? You should use permanent insurance such as whole life to cover a long term need . Term insurance comes in all kinds of packages . One year term , 5 , 10 , 20 , and 30 are the most common . There is level term and decreasing term . Level term the death benefit stays level , decreasing term the death benefit decreases . Term insurance can be renewable or non renewable . It can be convertible to whole life or non convertible . In some term policies the rate can be adjusted according to the companies mortality history , thus it allows for premium increase . Term insurance premiums go up at each renewal . As you can see there are a variety of factors involved when buying life insurance . Unless you know and really do a lot of research on the different policies you may not purchase the best product that will meet your goals . A good independent insurance agent who specializes in life insurance and represents multiple companies can help you find the right product for your individual situation .
Age could be a factor when purchasing annuities . Product suitability has many components ; one of them is age appropriate for seniors and young workers just starting out . Seniors in their late 70s and 80s can purchase annuities , but should they ? Annuities are ultimately bought for income . If the senior timeline is too short , theyll never recover their original contributions . Young workers generally have many priority needs and purchasing a non-qualified annuity and holding it long enough to escape the 10 % penalty is too long for most .
When do most people think about applying for Long Term Care Insurance ? When they are diagnosed with a possibly crippling disease . But the best time to apply for Long Term Care Insurance is before that diagnosis occurs . If you have a family history of diabetes , arthritis , heart disease , or other health conditions that could eventually hinder your ability to care for yourself , you may want to buy your long term care policy before your 50 's . If you are extremely healthy , you may be able to wait until your 60 's . I agree with Ken , that the mid to late 50 's is a good time to get a good rate and hopefully get ahead of those pesky health conditions that often strike in later life .
That is a great question ! Typically , if you are only a couple of days late , not much . The problems start when you are more than 20 days late , or are frequently late with your payments . Once your payment gets to be 30 days late , you are in serious risk of the policy cancelling , and then you are an uninsured driver , with all the penalties that go with that . You will also have trouble getting reinsured , and can expect to pay a much higher premium for a while . Frequently being late can have an adverse effect on your credit rating , and that means you can expect higher interest rates on your credit cards or no credit at all . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Late payments can possibly put you at risk of having no coverage so it is always a good idea to be on time . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms and conditions of your policy , but in some cases , companies include grace periods in their billing plans . However , they can also apply late fees for each late payment . This can add up . Say for example a company applies a $ 10.00 late fee for each late payment . If a person is paying monthly , that adds $ 120.00 a year to the cost of their car insurance . That can be a significant and avoidable increase over the agreed upon term premium .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Why Is Auto Insurance Expensive ?
Several factors affect car insurance rates , among them claims and violation history within the last 36 months , the age of all drivers in the household , the location of the risk , type and value of vehicle being insured , marital status of the insured and drivers , credit rating of named insured in Maryland and most states , use of vehicle , These discount may also impact your rates : prior insurance home owners good student multiple car marriage prior higher liability limits at least 6 months of prior coverage educational level profession and job type length of time licensed
Auto insurance rates are based on several factors . The clients driving history and experience , location and type of vehicle . Now there are other things taken into consideration which would be multi-packaging polices with the same company , multi-car , education and so on . An insurance company will take all this information and make a calculated rate based on all this criteria to determine a premium . So for example if you are a single male 25 years old who has been driving since 16 with no tickets or accidents and a college graduate driving a 2013 BMW the insurance company will take this information and come up with a rate . Now lets say the single male wants collision and comprehensive coverage and at least 100/300/100 liability limits on his policy for his $ 40,000 vehicle . The insurance company says if you pay us $ 600.00 for six months -LRB- just a number I made up -RRB- we will insure your car is covered up to the actual cash value and we will pay for any property damage you cause and bodily injury up to the limits you purchased . In a worst case scenario the single man can cause an accident -LRB- assuming he is liable -RRB- that could pay out as much as $ 440,000 . I would say this is a pretty inexpensive way to protect yourself .
Insurance companies are a little more expensive because of the rising cost of materials as well . You dont want an insurance company that can not pay a claim . They fluctuate to compensate for the rising cost in materials and labor to fix your vehicle . As long as your rates dont go up too much , then it should be ok . It only goes up quite a bit when you have tickets or accidents .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
Regardless of what type of insurance , if you 're asking why it 's priced the way it is , the answer is always this : it 's based on the actuarial data . Why is life insurance less expensive for women ? Because the data shows they live longer than men . Why is short term insurance less expensive ? Actually , I do n't know the specific actuarial data , but my guess is that the likelihood of your using insurance within 6 months is far less than if you had the insurance for many years .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
In addition to losing your license and visiting your local jail , you could subject yourself to financial ruin by not carrying auto insurance . The primary purpose of auto insurance is to protect yourself and others in the event of an accident . The vehicle itself should really be the least of your concerns . Dependent upon the circumstances , auto insurance could provide you coverage for injuries sustained by you . your passengers and others involved in the accident . Additionally , auto insurance could provide you with legal defense in the event you are sued . These are only some of the consequences you could face by not carrying adequate auto insurance . That 's why it is important to have an agent you can trust where you can sit down to discuss how to best protect yourself .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
Great question . The way auto policies are rated today includes a myriad of factors and that makes it difficult to predict premiums . The factors include the personal details of drivers , including their driving records and their credit reports and the year , make and model of the auto . You may be surprised to find that an `` expensive '' Lincoln costs less to insure than a `` less expensive '' compact car . Why ? Because little cars are more easily totaled in an accident and total loss claims are more expensive than simple repairs to a heavier vehicle ! In general if there are no changes to all the moving parts , you may expect your rate to be stable and perhaps go down over time if you have no claims . Another interesting factor is your carrier 's position in the local market . For example , in Florida there is a lot of market volatility and carriers come and go in the market . A new carrier may have aggressively low rates as they are eager to write more business and get market share . Going with that carrier may be a good deal for the first year or two , but you may well see big increases at renewal as the carrier adjusts their position in the market .
You can not sue someone for not having auto insurance . You can sue a person if the persons or party caused bodily injury and/or property damage to you . Auto insurance would normally cover the persons or party in this situation which is why you would carry auto insurance in the first place . However if the persons or party does not have the coverage you may take them to court to seek restitution . But you can not sue the persons or party just for not having auto insurance .
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Operating a car is expensive . Interestingly , it is much more expensive in most other countries . Insurance is one of the expenses of owning a car . If you have enough cash on hand to purchase another car should your car be determined to be a complete loss in an accident , you really dont need physical damage , comprehensive and collision , coverage at all . However it is unlikely you could pay for a large lawsuit resulting from personal injury and property damage that comes from an accident in which you are the guilty party . For that you should carry the highest liability limit that you can afford . What often appears to be the least expensive auto insurance can become the most expensive policy possible if the lawsuit and judgment exceeds the limits of liability in your auto policy . The cheapest auto insurance is the policy that pays the highest possible amount when you are sued .
Depending on your states laws . They have to give you 45 day notice in Montana and the can if you fraudulently put information on your application they can there are many reasons why they can . In many cases they Non renew you When you get an auto policy in most states it clearly states that you must list all drivers that regularly dive your auto and if you do n't then that is fraud and they can also use that to cancel on a Home if there is more of a risk then it is possible or 2 many claims there numerous factors that would apply contact a local agent and find out why there are many things that they can do to prevent this from happening
Why not buy whole life insurance ? Well , you know you 're right , why not ? It is the only policy you actually control , they ca n't take it away or price you out of it . They ca n't make changes without your permission , they ca n't really do anything because you control the policy . That is why whole life is more expensive than other types of coverage . The insurance company is giving up control to the insured , so would they price that low or high ? There are a ton of other reasons as well , but I want to keep this brief .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
Why get whole life insurance ? I ca n't give you a reason why you should , only why I did . I wanted a locked in price the day I bought it , till the day I died . I wanted something to work both if I died too early or lived too long . I wanted something I owned , that could not be taken away later on . I wanted to control the policy , not the insurance company . I wanted to take away an insurance company 's ability to say no to me . I wanted a safe place to put money to let it grow , to cover for my other investment choices . I wanted a place to access cash if needed , where I did n't have to explain to a guy in a cubicle `` why ? '' and get his blessing . If any of these reasons work for you , by all means consider the choice .
This is a great topic for one peculiar reason . Many folks in the US have forced placed insurance . This is the mortgage company taking over responsibility for securing coverage when you as the property owner have failed to do so . The main problem is that forced placed insurance is usually very expensive and imposed on the least educated consumers . Take charge your life and buy your insurance wherever you find the right coverage at the right price . Be as diligent in pursuit of a '' good deal '' on your homeowners insurance as you would on auto insurance . There are substantial variations in the coverages under a homeowners policy much more so than on an auto policy : here is why : Auto insurance protects you in your involvement with others so the greatest protection is for damages , Bodily injury or Property Damage that you do to others . So you are more often dealing with third party -LRB- the first party is the you , the second party is the insurer , and the third party is the one you injure -RRB- . Section II of a homeowners policy involves third party liability , but most of the property losses in general are first party payments by the insurer . Your house is hit by a tornado , Your insurer has to respond to you ! so , look at the nuances of coverages offered by insurers . They are many : including such things as scheduled property , water and sewer back up , automatic extension of dwelling limits , law and ordinance coverage , mold remediation , and so on . If you do n't understand the coverages offered ask your agent for an example of how a coverage would be used . An educated consumer is a better consumer .
Here are just a few reasons why you need life insurance : You own a home with your partner and have a mortgage . What will happen if you die prematurely and your partner can not afford to make the mortgage payments ? You have student loans , credit card debt or any type of debt . You have children who depend on your future income for daily living expenses and education . Funeral and burial expenses Your family would lose a loved one and have to deal with the pain of the loss . Why leave additional stress and the financial burden on family members to pay off outstanding debts .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Life Insurance Test Urine ?
Each life insurance company has death benefit amount thresholds that require urine analysis testing . A urine analysis is a biological chemistry expose of your bodys elimination or lack thereof . A urine test checks for waste products from the kidneys , nicotine use , drug use , glucose and nitrate levels as well as specific gravity and protein amounts .
An application for life insurance usually requires medical information . If the policy will exceed specified limits additional information is necessary . A urine specimen is normally required if the amount being applied for exceeds that limit . There are other techniques being used today such as mouth swabs and prescription evaluations and these have reduced the number of applicants who must give a urine specimen .
Yes . If you buy a fully underwritten policy they will take a urine sample as part of the underwriting process . The paramed exam will also include taking a blood sample , checking blood pressure , saliva testing , height and weight measurements , etc. . There are companies that specialize with non-med insurance . Assurity and Americo come to mind .
Yes , ING Life Companies will test for drugs in the presence of blood or urine in order to issue a life insurance policy . The only way to avoid such testing is to get such a small face amount that no blood or urine test is needed , or to apply for a No Exam life insurance policy that does not do those tests . Even then , they will normally ask about illegal drug use on the application . With some companies , the presence of marijuana in drug tests will not affect the rate too much . If the test shows signs of cocaine , meth or other illegal substances , then the policy would most likely be declined .
Urinalysis -LRB- UA -RRB- is used by life insurance companies to detect presence of disease when applying for medically underwritten policies . Urine tests used can point to the possibility of kidney disease , UTI , diabetes , liver disease , inflammation , even cancer . Sometimes excessive exercise or dieting can affect the HOS , so try to drink a lot of water , avoid alcohol , eat balanced meals , and avoid excessive exercise in the days before your urine test . Life insurance also uses urine to test for drug and tobacco use . If you use opoids -LRB- codeine , morphine , methadone , etc -RRB- for pain , or marijuana for medical or recreational use , explain that on your application or to the examiner collecting your urine sample . And keep in mind that cotinine -LRB- a metabolite of nicotine that is detected in urine and blood -RRB- can stay in the body for a long time after using tobacco . It is best to disclose all health conditions , medications , and tobacco use to your agent ahead of time , rather than have it be a surprise on your life insurance exam . That way you can be matched with the company that will give you the best rate , your underwriter will rate you as good as possible due to your honesty , and your policy will pay out if something happens to you .
What tests are run for life insurance depends on the coverage applied for and vary somewhat by company . For smaller amounts there may just be a non-medical declaration and depending on whether or not anything is declared there may be no testing . If urine , and/or blood , is required , testing could include testing for bodily functions . The presence of raised levels of certain substances , such as sugar in urine , would trigger more tests . In addition , testing is done for nicotine and for traces of illegal drugs . X-rays , electrocardiograms or other tests could also be required . It is very important to be truthful when completing an application for insurance . If you have a medical condition you are concerned about , then experience and independence are important . I suggest working with a local agent/broker . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Life insurance companies use a urine test , blood test , physical measurements and possibly a resting EKG to evaluate your overall health and your risk of death . A urine test is most commonly used to test for drugs or alcohol , but may also be used to test for certain medical conditions . A larger death benefit may require additional testing .
Life insurance tests urine for medically underwritten life insurance policies to detect drug and nicotine usage , among other things . Urinalyses can show evidence of diabetes -LRB- or poor diabetic control -RRB- , renal disease , cancer , blood disorders , or infection . Not all life insurance policies require a urine test ; nonmed policies do not perform blood or urine tests .
Yes , life insurance does test for the byproduct of nicotine , called cotinine , in the urine and/or blood that is tested for a life insurance exam . Cotinine is a more reliable indicator of actually smoking a cigarette than nicotine is , as sometimes nicotine tests can detect second hand smoke . With tobacco such as cigar or pipe , a very few companies will disregard cotinine in the blood or urine as long as it it disclosed on the application and there has been no cigarette usage in the past few years . Other than that , the insured person who tests positive for nicotine/cotinine will be rated as a Smoker .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test The urine test is the primary method for testing for drugs . Markers in the blood can also show evidence of drug use . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
MetLife offers life insurance that does drug test , and it also offers nonmed life insurance that does not drug test . The applications for both types of policies will ask if there has been illegal drug use in the past . One policy does a blood test and urine test , while the other just goes by what is on the application , which must be filled out honestly to prevent insurance fraud .
Life insurance carriers that require a blood and/or urine test to get a medically underwritten policy will test for indication of drug use . Some carriers , including Met Life , offer the option of a policy that does not require a blood or urine test . However , those carriers then usually require that the use of illegal substances be admitted on the application .
The tests that are done for a medically underwritten life insurance policy are a blood test and urine test . Blood and urine samples are tested for HIV , drug use , nicotine use , and to see whether the applicant has possible disease of the kidney , liver , stomach , heart and other organs .
Life insurance companies test urine for a number of things . It is a more affordable way than to test blood . However , depending on your age and face amount it is likely they will test both . Urine tests show drug , both prescription and illegal use , as well as nicotine/cotine for tobacco use . They also can find evidence of diabetes , heart issues , cancer and kidney disease .
Most health insurance applications do not require blood or urine specimens . But on occasion an underwriter will ask for a physical exam including certain tests . If you have a history of abnormal test results in the past , such as high cholesterol counts , or blood or sugar in your urine , testing may be requested . Sometimes an underwriter will request an EKG if you had cardiac tests in the past that were abnormal .
While life insurance does not test directly for cancer , the blood or urine test can reveal labs that might point to cancer . Total blood count -LRB- showing excessively high or low white or red blood cell counts -RRB- would be the most obvious , but abnormal liver labs or even high protein in the urine could be examples of other tests that COULD indicate cancer . That is why , if labs are abnormal , insurance companies will often postpone until you can get a diagnosis for those results . Once the condition is treated , they will pick up where they left off .
Each life insurance company has death benefit amount thresholds that require urine analysis testing . A urine analysis is a biological chemistry expose of your bodys elimination or lack thereof . A urine test checks for waste products from the kidneys , nicotine use , drug use , glucose and nitrate levels as well as specific gravity and protein amounts .
Only policies that use medical underwriting will test you for drug use through a blood and/or urine test . Simplified issue policies do not order blood tests , but they usually do ask about drug use on your life insurance application . Guaranteed issue life insurance does not ask about drug use on your application , nor does it test for it . However , the minimum age for guaranteed issue life insurance is usually at least 40 years old . If the drug use that you are referring to is marijuana , that generally is not a problem , if you apply with the right companies . Using marijuana after a recent DUI or after treatment for addiction is problematic . And of course , using cocaine , meth or heroin makes it difficult to get all but the most lenient -LRB- and therefore , most expensive -RRB- of life insurance policies . Talk to a life insurance agency that you can trust to find out what type of policy is workable for you , at the lowest possible price . They are bound to privacy and no insurance company will see your name unless you actually apply for the policy .
When applying for a policy that uses medical underwriting , most life insurance companies test for smoking through both a urine test and a blood test on samples collected during the life insurance exam . If you are purchasing a policy that does not require taking an exam , neither of these tests are done .
Fully underwritten life insurance requires blood and urine tests for a variety of medical items . Urine analysis can detect smoking behavior by testing for cotinine a byproduct of tobacco in cigarettes . Cigarette smoking can impact your life expectancy , so the life insurance company charges more because your life span is less based on the statistics of smokers .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Edward Jones Offer Health Insurance ?
This is a good question . The employer will normally determine employee eligibility . Some factors are full or part time , hours worked and there may be a waiting period . You can apply for your own individual health plan and if you change careers you wo n't have to worry about your health plan terminating with your job .
Edward Jones ' motto is `` Making Sense of Investing '' . While many life insurance policies accumulate cash value in a tax friendly fashion and are part of a good financial portfolio , most life insurance policies sold are not investments , but simple protection for the loss of financial resources in the event of death . Kudos to Edward Jones for recognizing the importance of life insurance and for carrying products to meet that need . However , just as Edward Jones 's expertise is in investing , you may find that it takes someone with an expertise in life insurance to find the best life insurance rate for someone with a health condition or other risk factors . It also can help to have the prices of many companies to choose from , to find the lowest price .
Edward Jones does sell annuities . They have variable annuities and a few companies that offer fixed annuities . Choosing between the two will depend what your goals and objectives are . Your advisor should know what your tolerance for market fluctuation is and your long term investment objective . Annuities are great in the right situations .
Yes . This firm has , for many years , encouraged its financial advisors to offer life insurance along with other financial products . Among regional broker-dealers and wire-house firms , Edward Jones was one of the first to make life insurance a priority at a firm level . Many broker-dealers today still do not .
Almost every broker dealer or wire house the size of Edward Jones has registered representatives that are alsolicensedlife insurance agents . Thesefinancialinstitutionsgenerally have access toseverallife insurance companies to give you a broad selection to choose from to meet the coverage needs of your family , business or estate .
Met life variable is directly related on how well the Dow Jones Does . If the Dow Jones has a bad year meaning it goes down in value in the full year , than most likely your variable will too . The variable will swing up or down just like the stock market . If you anticipate a bad year in the Dow Jones then your variable will to in most cases depending on what its invested in .
With more than 34 years of experience in the HSA/Health insurance business , I 'm happy to offer my expert and unbiased answer . Although the average deductible has substantially increased over the last 30 years , the popularity of the HSA concept is here ... and here to stay . High Deductible Health Insurance plans -LRB- HSA -RRB- are very popular for individuals and families that want quality medical coverage from reputable companies , but at a rate they can afford . Even with the passage of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- aka Obamacare -RRB- , the popularity of HSA accounts has increased . But what about the future of these types of plans ? Their popularity is not likely to decrease , since health insurance costs keep increasing , and there is no other type of coverage that can offer a combination of network-negotiated discounts and paying for healthcare , dental , and vision expenses with tax-free dollars . However , as our political landscape changes , be prepared for unanticipated changes ! As we move closer to 2017 and 2018 , many legislative changes are planned . These changes could impact the cost of coverage and the amount of federal subsidy that is received . Both the group sector and individual sector could be adversely affected . So ... Expect HSAs to continue to be a popular and `` normal '' choice to consider for individuals , families , and small and large businesses . Answer provided by Edward Harris , one of the nation 's premier healthcare authorities . Edward is the owner of majormedicalhealth.com , where consumers can compare the best health insurance rates from top-rated companies .
It is a universal life product that credits interest based on the performance of stock indexes . You are not buying the actual stocks or stock index so there is no market loss exposure . In good years you get some of the upside but in down years you get either no interest credited or something low and guaranteed e.g. 1 % . Most indexed universal life products use the most common index , the S&P 500 . A few products have been developed recently using indexes from around the world such as S&P 500 , Dow Jones , EURO STOX 50 , Hang Seng . Some use a more complex approach which blends them in a formula . Some blended index approaches weight the blend taking 75 % of the best and 25 % of the second best of the three selected over a time period e.g. one year on the belief that results over time should be better than a single index approach . Others are a more static formula e.g. Dow Jones industrial Avg -LRB- 35 % -RRB- , Barclays capital U.S. Aggregate Bond Index -LRB- 35 % -RRB- , Euro Stoxx 50 Index -LRB- 20 % -RRB- , Russell 2000 Index -LRB- 10 % -RRB- . The bottom line is that global index products attempt to find ways to reliably credit higher interest over time using averaging or weighted averaging . While we like the idea of these global blended products , we have a bias towards simpler index products that clients can better understand .
The types of jobs that offer the best health insurance benefits typically come from large profitable companies that are well-established . The more income and revenue the company generates , the greater the likelihood that the healthcare coverage will be partially or fully covered by a generous benefits package . Before accepting a position with a potential employer , you can ask about the medical benefits , the costs , and the options that are offered to new and veteran employees . You may also be able to negotiate a different healthcare package . It 's likely that comprehensive and catastrophic plans are both offered . Important : Answer was provided by Edward Harris , one of the leading health insurance experts in the US . His nationally-recognized website Healthinsurancezoom.org offers the best health insurance rates from top-rated companies .
Fixed annuities have fixed rate of returns credit once every year on your anniversary date . It is compounded normally daily . Then their are fixed index annuities that offer a fixed rate of return or one that is indexed to the indexes such as the Dow Jones or Nasdaq and several other indexes each insurance company has its own twist on its offering of index plans
If you lost your job and health insurance within the last 60 days , you can qualify for an SEP -LRB- Special Enrollment Period -RRB- . OK ... So what is an SEP ? If Open Enrollment has ended , it allows you to purchase a Marketplace plan with full subsidies -LRB- if you qualify -RRB- and have your pre-exsisting conditions covered . No waiting period or extra copay or deductible for these conditions . You can choose among all of the available major carriers that offer coverage in your area . This `` qualifying event '' allows you to obtain affordable medical coverage at any time of the year . You will not have to answer medical questions , and you do not have to keep the same company that you had while working at your previous employer . An experienced broker and his/her website will be very helpful . Insist on a broker with at least 25 years of experience in the business . NOTE : COBRA may be available , but typically will be more expensive than an Exchange plan -LRB- especially if you qualify for a federal subsidy -RRB- . Short-term -LRB- temporary -RRB- plans are also offered by many top-rated companies . However , they are non-compliant , do not cover pre-existing conditions , and are not eligible for subsidies . Important : This question was answered by Edward Harris , one of the nation 's leading and most experienced -LRB- 35 years -RRB- health insurance brokers . His website , Majormedicalhealth.com , is the premier trusted healthcare website in the US , and offers the lowest individual and family rates from top-rated companies . UPDATE : The Supreme Court has still not rendered its decision regarding subsidies . UPDATE : July 2015 . The decision has been made ! Subsidies will continue to be paid on both state and federal Exchanges .
The cash value of any whole life policy earns interest . The amount of interest is contractual in a whole life policy . That interest rate reflects the companys anticipated earnings . An indexed universal life looks to an established external index to determine the interest rate . This could be the Dow Jones Average , Standard and Poors or several others . These indexes then provide the insurance company with the interest that they are to apply to the policy . The interest rate isnt guaranteed , although some policies will not charge negative interest if the index dips below zero .
Individual health insurance coverage can be easily compared , which allows you to obtain the lowest available rates along with quality benefits . The key is finding the best offered plans , and understanding what type of policy you need . Utilizing an experienced broker is also critical . You 'll receive valuable free advice from a resource that represents all major carriers . Verifying that your doctor , specialist , or hospital is `` in-network '' is just one of the many important services that we -LRB- experienced brokers -RRB- provide . And having a clear understanding of how your prescription coverage will be treated is also quite important . Now that the ACA legislation has been passed , and single and family healthcare coverage is so different than prior to 2014 , it 's imperative to work with an experienced broker that can help you understand which plans best meet your budget and still offer the comprehensive -LRB- or catastrophic , if needed -RRB- benefits that will pay your medical bills . Another important factor is the accurate calculation of your federal subsidy . Depending upon your FPL -LRB- Federal Poverty Level -RRB- , you may qualify for financial assistance that pays most or all of your premium . Understanding network availability is also critical when reviewing different plans . If you live in Ohio , for example , is the Cleveland Clinic a covered provider ? That 's the type of information that must be considered along with the obvious rate and benefit concerns . IMPORTANT : The answer to this question was provided by Edward Harris , one of the nation 's premier health insurance experts with more than 34 years of experience . Harris manages several top-rated websites , including majormedicalhealth.com , which provides the lowest health insurance rates to consumers from the largest carriers . Our clients receive unbiased service and advice at any time .
That is a great question ! There are a lot ! Simply put , there are two categories of annuities . One you plunk down your cash , and it immediately begins paying out your monthly payments , These are called `` immediate annuities '' . The other type takes your cash , and holds it , or `` defers '' the payments for a number of years before paying those monthly payouts . These are called `` deferred annuities '' . There are several different types of these , but again very simply , there are `` fixed annuities '' , that pay a set interest rate , there are `` indexed annuities '' , that pay interest rates that are based on the movements of a market , like the S&P 500 , or the Dow Jones . There are also `` variable annuities '' , that pay according to how well the investments within the annuity did -LRB- or did n't -RRB- do . That is a basic look at the types of annuities , I hope that helped . Please feel free to drop me a line if you 'd like more details , ok ? Thanks for asking !
Typically , a health insurer must have a valid reason to terminate your policy . Some of the most common reasons are the discontinuation of the plan , non-grandfathering a specific policy , or if the carrier is no longer offering plans in that area , or the entire state . Of course , submission of fraudulent claims or misrepresentation of information can also cause a plan to terminate . If your policy was canceled `` without explanation , '' simply contact the carrier and ask why the plan was terminated , were you notified in writing , and can it be reinstated . There should be a valid reason . NOTE : An experienced broker is generally considered a better choice than healthcare.gov when comparing options and seeking unbiased and experienced advice . IMPORTANT : Answer was provided by Edward Harris , one of the leading US health insurance brokers with more than 35 years of experience . His top-rated website Healthinsurancezoom.com provides consumers with the lowest available rates from the most reputable companies .
Self-employed health insurance can be very affordable , if you shop the right way . A big mistake made by small business owners is that they either incorrectly calculate their federal subsidy , or choose a policy that appears to very inexpensive , but ultimately becomes extremely expensive because of higher-than anticipated premiums and high out-of-pocket costs that were not initially understood or explained . An experienced broker can review all Exchange plans -LRB- Platinum , Gold , Silver , Bronze , and Catastrophic -RRB- , determine the correct subsidy , explain Health Savings Accounts -LRB- HSAs -RRB- and determine if they the tax benefits and low premiums would be beneficial . Also , accurate calculation of the federal subsidy is critical , and it 's important that a broker offer his/her expertise so you do n't owe an unexpected tax bill in the Spring . The ACA Legislation has changed the scope of US healthcare , and professional expert and unbiased guidance is always recommended . And each year , new plans and carriers become available on state and federal Marketplaces . The SHOP Marketplace is also available for small business owners . IMPORTANT : This question was answered by Edward Harris , one of the premier health insurance brokers in the US , and owner of majormedicalhealth.com , which provided free online quotes and the lowest rates from top-rated companies .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Firstly , we hope your son continues to recover and has a full and speedy recovery . Our thoughts and prayers are with him . If you are injured in an automobile accident , and you have minor or significant injuries , nearly all companies will pay for the medical expenses , up to the stated limits of the policy that is providing coverage . Medical payments coverage , although optional , is covered on nearly all policies in `` fault '' states . If the driver of the other car is at-fault , they are required to carry specific minimum limits of bodily injury . Typically it is between $ 15,000 and $ 30,000 per person . If it is a `` no-fault '' state , PIP -LRB- Personal Injury Protection -RRB- is typically required and will pay for the damages , although it does not matter who was at fault . Lost wages would also be covered . If the other driver has no car insurance , then uninsured motorist protection of the driver of your vehicle can step in and pay . If your driver is not covered , you can utilize your healthcare coverage or begin litigation against the driver . IMPORTANT : Answer was provided by Edward Harris , one of the leading US car insurance brokers with more than 30 years of experience . His award-winning website Carinsurancezoom.org provides free online quotes and offers the lowest auto insurance rates from the most reputable companies .
All drivers on your car insurance policy have to be listed ... although not necessarily rated . For example , all family members that are licensed , and live in the household , typically must be rated . That is , they are assigned to a specific vehicle as a principle or occasional driver . Of course , they can usually drive any insured vehicle in the household . `` Family '' car policies are quite prevalent , and offer very flexible coverage . Occasionally , a driver that is a full-time household member has their own car and their own insurance policy . In these situations , although they may be listed on the family policy , that person and their vehicle are not charged . However , if the insurance lapses on that vehicle , then it is possible that they will subsequently have to be rated on the main family policy . Important : This answer was provided by Edward Harris , one of the leading US authorities on auto insurance rates , and the owner of Carinsurancezoom.org , the premier trusted website for obtaining the lowest auto insurance prices in all states .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Does Permanent Disability Insurance Cover ?
What does permanent disability cover ? This appears to be a mixed question so lets see if I can make mud out of it . What defines `` permanent disability '' ? For the absolute best it would read as follows . . '' unable to do the material aspects of their current occupation and under a doctor 's care . '' That describes the best disability language you can get .
Every insurance company has different criteria for their Disability policies . So you would need to review the fine print of each policy to see what causes of disability , or what levels of disability , each policy excludes . Some things that different Disability insurance policies might not cover , or might limit coverage for , are disability due to mental or nervous disorders -LRB- some put a two year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability due to drug or alcohol abuse -LRB- some put a one year limit on those benefits -RRB- , disability caused while committing a crime -LRB- this is usually not covered at all -RRB- , or disability caused by acts of war . Some policies also will cover total or permanent disability , but not partial or residual disability . Again , it is important to shop around and purchase a policy with the features that are most likely to be used , but also pick and choose so that you get a rate you can afford .
Permanent Disability Insurance could be Long Term Disability Insurance that is set up with a benefit to age 65 . Therefore , if a permanent disability is suffered , the policy will pay the benefit until retirement age . In Australia , Total and Permanent Disability -LRB- TPD -RRB- insurance is a policy that would pay a lump sum if the insured person suffered total and permanent disability .
There are two main types of life insurance , term and permanent , The other types of policies fit into those two groups . Term insurance covers you for a period of time , called a term . Term insurance is usually , but not always , guaranteed not to go up in price for that term of years . It usually does not have any cash value . Permanent insurance can cover you for the rest of your life , or permanently . But you need to check on the terms of permanent insurance , as not all are guaranteed to cover you for the rest of your life , and for some , the premium is not guaranteed to remain level . Permanent insurance usually has some cash value . To be sure you are buying the best type of policy or policies for your needs , contact a licensed agent to help you determine which type of life insurance will cover the loss you intend it to cover .
What does permanent disability cover ? This appears to be a mixed question so lets see if I can make mud out of it . What defines `` permanent disability '' ? For the absolute best it would read as follows . . '' unable to do the material aspects of their current occupation and under a doctor 's care . '' That describes the best disability language you can get .
Yes . Whole life is a permanent life insurance . The premium and the death benefit can be guaranteed for your entire lifetime . So can the cash value . This makes the product an extremely competitive cash accumulation vehicle for the conservative part of your portfolio . And why would you want the premium and the death benefit to be permanently guaranteed ? Well , imagine yourself buying term insurance and then outliving the policy . Now you need to buy another one . And youre older , so the price is automatically higher . And what if you unfortunately have a serious medical condition ? The price could be even higher . Worse , you may not qualify for coverage at all ! Permanent insurance means you permanently dont have to worry about qualifying for coverage . Whole life does that very well . But remember this : these guarantees come at a big cost . Especially the guaranteed cash value . What if you like the idea of permanent guarantees , but want to spend less on the coverage ? You do have an option : guaranteed universal life insurance . You can get the premium and the death benefit guaranteed for your lifetime at least until age 121 :-RRB- . You just wont have any cash guaranteed to grow inside the policy . Guaranteed universal life is also permanent insurance . Its a cheaper version of whole life , without the cash . Kind of like permanent term insurance .
When considering a disability policy to purchase , consider everything , but focus on a couple of things . 1st , the easiest way to find out what the policy would n't cover is spelled out on the exceptions page or not covered section . Straight forward it will state directly what the policy wo n't do . 2nd , read their definition of disability . This may sound strange to read , but the best policies for disabilities have the shortest definitions of disability . Basically when you read the definition , anything beyond that first sentence is something that will reduce your benefit . For example , my disability policy defines total disability as `` not being able to do your current job and under a doctors care . '' That 's it , that 's all . Nothing follows it . It does n't care if I can do my job or another , just my current job . End of story . Also , when you consider a DI policy look at residual coverage . Residual is for partial disabilities where you can work , but not as much as before . It will have a similar definition as total disability , but will define by percentage of work you can or ca n't do . So half time would be 50 % loss . A good residual definition will also determine at what point partial becomes fully . I write this as I am on claim on my own disability policies . I contracted an infection that lead to an amputation . Believe me , a good policy does n't present you with too many hoops or requirements to meet .
`` Better '' is a completely subjective term in this case . The question is really about covering your risk and whether that risk is temporary or permanent . Term insurance is usually used to offset a temporary risk such as a mortgage or other debt that has a specific term . Whole Life , and other types of permanent insurance , are generally used to cover risks that are ongoing with no expiration date , like your income or living expenses . When working with my clients , we spend more time identifying risks and classifying them as temporary or permanent , then assigning amounts to each . The we match the product to the risk and the budget . If cash flow is n't an issue -LRB- which it usually is -RRB- , I recommend 100 % permanent insurance as it 's the most cost effective over the long run . If you live long enough , the cash value in the policy will equal or surpass the premiums paid , effectively making your net outlay zero or better . What I usually find is that people do have a budget but still want to cover themselves properly and we end up covering the temporary risk with term insurance and the permanent risk with some type of permanent insurance , like whole life . The more important question is n't which is better , but how much is needed . Set up correctly , you could start out with mostly or all term insurance and convert it to permanent as your budget allows . Another factor to consider is age and insurability . The earlier in life you buy life insurance and the healthier you are , the less it will cost . In summary , the best insurance is the insurance you buy now , when you 're younger and healthier . Find a good advisor and he/she will help you determine the amount and type which best fits your situation . Get insured first and lock in your insurability . You can always make changes in the future .
At this time Suzy Orman reccomends Term Life insuance . In the past few years she has become a bit more tolerant of permanent products in some of her apperances . One should understand that Suzy does not have an insurance background , she has a securities background . The Securities industry has not promoted permanent life insurance since the laws were changed in the 1980s restricting how much money could be put into permanent life coverage in regards to tax status . Suzy was taught permanent was bad , by people who honestly felt permanent insurance took away money they could have for investment elsewhere . One thing to keep in mind when purchasing term insurance is always look for a `` convertible term '' policy . A convertible term policy allows you the option to purchase a new permanent policy without underwriting in the future just in case your planning does not come out exactly as you expected .
The person with the best permanent life insurance plan is you , if your plan is in force at the full face amount . If you die your heirs are not going to care whether your plan had the best rate of return or the lowest net cost . They will be thrilled that you loved them enough to provide the death benefit that they received because the policy was in force . The best permanent life insurance is the policy that is in force on the day that you die . Regardless of premiums paid , the death benefit will normally be far greater . Permanent life insurance is much more likely to pay a death benefit as only a very small percentage of term life insurance policies result in a death claim . It is quite likely that the best permanent insurance life policy is the one that you purchased several years ago . In this situation , the older , the better . As a policy gets older the increase in cash value each year approaches the premium , making the actual cost of the policy negligible . It is quite likely that the best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you purchased when you were in better health . If you can only get rated life insurance now , then obviously , a non-rated policy would have been better . Many companies offer preferred and extra-preferred rates to individuals , who meet certain weight guidelines , are free of a history of certain diseases and exhibit other healthy characteristics . Over a life time these discounts are significant . The best permanent life insurance policy is one that doesnt have any loans against it . Loans are perfectly acceptable , however , they do accrue interest and they also reduce the death benefit . While a loan may be appropriate , paying back the loan is also a good idea . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one with an up to date beneficiary . A remarkably high number of policies are paid to the wrong person every year . This person isnt wrong according to the law ; however , it is not the person that the owner of the policy wished to receive the benefit . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one purchased from a knowledgeable life insurance agent . This is an agent who has been recommended to you . This agent should listen carefully to you and provide solid financial advice . When the agent makes recommendations they should be in the form of a plan that you can handle financially . It doesnt do any good to start a plan only to later discontinue the plan . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one which is reviewed each year with that same knowledgeable life insurance agent . If there are changes necessary the agent can take care of them quickly saving you consternation later . Since additional protection might be necessary to meet your changing requirements , the agent can give solid advice on how best to cover those needs . The best permanent life insurance policy isnt the result of the superior results of an insurance company . Every company admitted in your state has been scrutinized by your insurance commissioner . Your insurance commissioner is charged with administering the insurance companies admitted or domiciled in your state . In particular , the commissioner is interested in making sure that the insurance companies can keep their promises . In the end that is what you want , a promise kept . The best permanent life insurance policy is the one that you already own or the one that you will purchase soon .
Mortality in the United States stubbornly remains at 100 % . If you want to purchase a life insurance policy in anticipation of receiving a death benefit , then a permanent policy is your sole option . All other policies have a termination date . I am using the term permanent because it includes other policies that share these features with a whole life policy . Death is not the only opportunity for receiving benefits from a permanent life insurance policy . Throughout the existence of the policy you have access to the cash value of the policy . You can either withdraw money or take a policy loan . A policy loan does not require an application and can be taken in total privacy . These loans have assisted business owners through stressful period of time , by providing capital to keep the business afloat . Business owners often use permanent life insurance to make sure that funds are available for surviving partners to purchase the interest of a deceased partner in a business . They also use permanent life insurance in compensation packages . Some people use their permanent life insurance policy in their estate plan to pay taxes and to make sure heirs receive equal treatment . It is an excellent way to give a gift to a university or religious organization . The systematic nature of deposits in a permanent life insurance policy has enabled some people to develop significant wealth . It certainly can form the stable component of an overall financial strategy . The return in a permanent life insurance policy is competitive with other high-quality , fixed return assets and can provide tax free distributions as well as income tax free death benefits . Financial planning is about shifting assets . The most important shift is from current consumption to future consumption . You can make a choice between a low-fat caramel macchiato and money in your future . While certain coffee franchise would take offense that is really be beginning of the process . How much are you willing to invest in your future ? Because of its semi-compulsory nature , a permanent life insurance policy is a great place to start . I havent met anyone yet who honestly told me that they have too much permanent life insurance . Usually they are lamenting the escalating cost of their term life insurance . Today a significant amount of life insurance is purchased by people over age 60 . Can you imagine how they would have preferred to have made that purchase thirty years ago for the cost of a stop at the coffee shop ? Whole life insurance is the fully guaranteed permanent life insurance product . It is the basic policy from which all other forms of life insurance have been developed . Some will hold that whole life insurance is too expensive . However , if you are looking for a lifetime of coverage you will find it is very inexpensive unless you are wildly successful investor . If you look at the sum of premiums alone you will find that by life expectancy that term life insurance will have cost a significantly greater amount of money than the whole life .
The BEST life insurance product is the one that meets your needs . Therefore , you must ask yourself ; What is the goal ??? Term and Permanent insurance are two different products for two completely different needs . Term insurance is a product for just that , a fixed term , with either a level premium for the selected term or an increase annual payment if you were to choose renewable term . Since the contract isfor a fixed period of time , premiums are typically a portion of what the same coverage would be with a Permanent product as there are no cash accumulation or surrender features , making it affordable for those who need it . Regardless , term insurance is great for those with a need for coverage in the event of a loss of life , for a fixed term , i.e. the income or performance of the insured will be relied on by others . Additionally , term insurance is a great way for families with a limited income , to protect and provide for the family and young children in the event of the loss of the family breadwinner or equally important , the caregiver -LRB- many `` breadwinners '' undervalue the benefit provided by the stay-at-home spouse and over look childcare costs ! -RRB- which will help with living and education expenses for the surviving family . In the future , these young families can always re-analyze goals and needs and when their income allows , and convert to a permanent product . Term is also very useful for businesses to protect themselves against the loss of production and revenue in the event of a death of a key employee . This type of insurance planning called Key-man coverage , is cost affordable when using term insurance . Lastly , many of the attractive riders that are issued with permanent life policies can also be issued with term policies . Permanent insurance is a product with virtually infinite uses depending on your needs . Permanent life insurance products are just that , permanent for the life of the insured , so long as the owner has paid a sufficient amount of premium to maintain the coverage . In comparison to term , permanent life insurance is more expensive in order to account for the cost of insurance in later years of the insureds life . However , there are multiple advantages to buying permanent coverage as soon as you can afford it when you are younger . Aside from a lower level premium amount to carry the policy to maturity , more time will allow for a larger accumulation of cash value in the policy . This cash value , accumulating at a tax-deferred rate that beats current treasuries , can also be accessed through policy loans and withdrawals in the event of emergency cash needs , can be used as collateral for business or personal loans and can also be used to support you during retirement , assuming that the need for coverage has been reduced . There are two main forms of permanent coverage , Whole Life products and Universal Life products , each with their own attractive features including dividends , increasing death benefit , flexible premiums and crediting rates indexed to stock market performances . Before making the decision to purchase either , be sure to sit down for a -LSB- typically free -RSB- consultation with a licensed life insurance agent who will help you identify both your short term and longer term needs and goals . Together , you should be able to put together an effective plan that will blend affordability and proper protection to meet your life insurance needs .
When to buy permanent life insurance ? That is a good question . Some agents recommend buying permanent life insurance for every policy . Some financial consultants recommend never buying permanent life insurance . Both have some valid justifications , but both are rather extreme positions . In real life , with budget limitations , health risks , bear markets , and other considerations , it is hard for me to recommend only one option . Not everyone can afford all the life insurance they need in permanent coverage . Yet buying only term presents the risk of being unable to qualify for a new policy when the current one expires . Putting money in the stock market and savings plans should cover final expense needs , eliminating the need for permanent life insurance . But will those investments and savings be there when you die ? My recommendations are to buy Term insurance for temporary needs , and Permanent insurance for lifelong needs . Specifically , permanent insurance is best for final expense needs such as funeral , burial , paying off credit cards , and other costs associated with putting the deceased to rest . Permanent insurance is recommended if you want to use the policy proceeds to pay estate taxes , pass money to heirs , or bequeath money to a charity . If you use term insurance for any purpose that may find you `` outliving the term '' , you may find that you no longer qualify for a new policy , and that all your plans for your life insurance are moot .
How much life insurance you need and what kind depends on a number of factors . Life insurance plays an important role in your financial and retirement planning . Life insurance creates cash at death and can also offer tax advantaged growth . The first step is to clarify what you want to accomplish and if the need is temporary or permanent . In a family situation , for example , you might want to replace your income , pay off the mortgage , establish an emergency fund , an education fund , pay fees and taxes at death and/or leave a legacy . In this situation , your advisor can help with the calculations . You can find basic calculators online to get you started . In a business situation , you might want insurance to fund a buy-sell agreement , provide a buffer fund for the death of a key person or as an executive or employee benefit . If your need is temporary , such as covering a short term loan , then a term policy is appropriate . If there is a possibility you may need permanent coverage in the future , you should check to see what conversion options to permanent coverage are available . If your need is permanent , which means that you want the coverage to pay when you die , not if you die before the policy expires , then a permanent policy is appropriate . Whole Life and Universal Life are two types of permanent insurance . Permanent cash value insurance has tax preferred growth that you can take advantage of . An independent insurance broker can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Video Transcript : What is permanent life insurance ? Permanent life insurance could be universal life , it could be whole life , it could be variable life . Any of those 3 are permanent forms . Depending upon how far out you want to go in the maturity date , some of these contracts go to age 100 , some even farther out . Even some guarantee permanent contracts , you can make it small enough in the timeline to actually terminate at age 85 . You want to make sure that if you 're using permanent insurance , you 're telling me that you have permanent financial indebtedness or future obligations that are not going to go away . That 's why we 're not looking at term , you 're looking at permanent forms of insurance to cover indebtedness , future obligation , charitable intent , and to replace a person 's income when they die .
when does permanent life insurance make sense ? Permanent life insurance makes great sense if you life too long as term will be long gone at that point in your life . Term covers periods of time when unexpected death `` may '' occur . Permanent covers a life . One type of insurance covers a probability and the other covers a certainty .
How does Disability Insurance protect you ? By protecting your INCOME . Unless we are fortunate enough to have a partner who makes enough to support our lifestyles , most of us would undergo substantial hardship by losing our source of income due to a disability . Even short term disabilities can quickly deplete the reserves some of us have stashed away for emergencies . Long Term or permanent disabilities can be devastating to even high income earners . Having Disability Insurance does not provide you with 100 % of your original salary , but can replace approx 70 % of it so that you at least have some time to regroup and evaluate your employment and lifestyle situation . It may be possible to live on 70 % of your income , even indefinitely . It is not possible to live with no income at all . That is the protection Disability Insurance provides .
Yes , disability insurance is really paycheck insurance and protects your income stream in the event an accident or illness prevents you from working . There are two type of disability insurance ; Short Term & Long Term disability . Short term plans usually cover periods of 13 or 26 weeks . Long Term plans , as their name implies , run for longer terms that can go on for years depending upon the policy . It is estimated that a 20 year old has a 25 % chance of being disabled for some period of time before they reach retirement age . Currently 12 % of the U.S. population is disabled with only 5 % of those disabilities being work related . So , a health problem or off the job accident is the most likely cause of someone becoming disabled . A recent report shows the average Social Security Disability payment is $ 1065 per month and qualifying for Social Security disability is famous for being difficult and time consuming with waits of 2 years for approval not being uncommon and as of 2009 , only 30 % of Social Security disability claims were approved . Relying on Social Security alone to preserve your lifestyle in the event of a disability is unwise . The majority of persons who experience a disabling event can return to work within about 90-days . But , for persons who experience a disability exceeding 90-days the average length of these types of disabling events is 3.2 years ! Ideally , a person will have both short term and long term disability insurance protection . Short term disability insurance will be less expensive and if your budget does n't allow for both coverages I would suggest starting out with short term coverage for the longest coverage period possible . If you are a female I would also recommend that you verify how a prospective short term disability policy treats maternity . Some policies treat maternity as a disabling event while others do not . This can be an important difference for a woman in her child bearing years .
Yes . Many individuals will set up a short term disability policy as well as a long-term disability policy to cover different types of scenarios -LRB- e.g. if you become permanently disabled vs. being temporarily disabled -RRB- . Some individuals will have a group DI policy through an employer and supplement it with an individual DI policy if they feel the group DI does n't provide enough benefits or a very good `` definition of disability '' -LRB- the most important factor with DI coverage -RRB- - when buying disability insurance , make sure of -LRB- and understand -RRB- the definition of disability that 's being cited in the program -LRB- own occupation , modified , or gainful - this is the most important factor in your disability policy as it will determine if you are eligible for a claim when something happens -RRB- . Please note , disability insurance policies coordinate benefits so there 's a limit to how much coverage and what kind you can secure -LRB- most carriers will keep it to a maximum of 70 % of income - the percentage can vary by insurance company -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help setting up coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What type of disability insurance should I get ? The one that provides you the best definiton of disability that you can afford . Disability insurance is all about the definition of what is a `` disability '' . What you 'll find is the best disability plans have the fewest words in describing what disability is . Without a solid definition , you have a policy you pay for , that does n't pay you back when you have a claim .
end question
start question
annuities
Why Do People Hate Annuities ?
People do n't hate annuities . But certain sectors of the financial community dislike annuities because of it 's tax deferral and longer term commitment , i.e. they ca n't move it . Product competitors like mutual fund purveyors , promote the so called negative aspect of annuities to prop up their own product line .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
why do doctors hate Medicare ? Mainly because Medicare payment rates to doctors are below what it costs them to run their office and procedures . So seeing too many Medicare patients can hurt a doctor 's practice . That is why so many limit how many Medicare patients they will see without supplement plans to accompany the Medicare coverage .
People do n't hate annuities . But certain sectors of the financial community dislike annuities because of it 's tax deferral and longer term commitment , i.e. they ca n't move it . Product competitors like mutual fund purveyors , promote the so called negative aspect of annuities to prop up their own product line .
Some life insurance policies do require an exam and some do n't . Policies with very small face amounts -LRB- under $ 50,000 -RRB- usually do not require an exam . People with serious health problems often take no exam policies because their exam results and medical records disqualify them from medically underwritten policies . Many people prefer no exam policies because they hate needles , or do not want to take the time to do the exam . For those in the Standard health rating range , the cost of a nonmed policy is often very competitive with a policy that requires an exam .
I do not believe that Republicans -LRB- or Democrats -RRB- hate Medicare . Both parties -LRB- I hope -RRB- want to save Medicare so that it will be available for many many more years . Unless certain changes are made , Medicare , as we know it now , is at risk . It is true that both parties differ in how we will solve this problem , but as an experienced impartial broker with more than 30 years of experience , I do not believe that Republicans hate Medicare .
why do babies need life insurance ? There are several reasons life insurance for a baby makes sense . One is simply just planning for the future for that child through a cash value policy that grows over time . Coupled with a guaranteed insurability option , a good plan takes away an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' down the road . That in it 's self is very important . Taking away `` no '' is a wonderful feeling . Another reason is what if the unthinkable happens ? Would a family need time , would they need money to have a service or even buy a headstone ? Imagine the stress of having to budget the service for your child ? How much hate and resentment would happen having to tell a spouse `` no , it costs too much '' ?
If you live in Tennessee , Arkansas or Mississippi give me a call or e-mail me and I 'll help you out . This is becoming a mantra with me so here it goes - seek out an experienced health insurance agent and have them review your situation and your options both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplaces . Of course , you can go to some online web sites and there 's always HealthCare.gov that is supposed to make purchasing health insurance so simple . However , ObamaCare , whether you love it or hate it , has done many things but making understanding what you are buying simpler for the average consumer is not one of them . There are many , many fine points regarding provider networks , how the consumer can access care , how different health care services are covered from one product to another , what prescription drugs are covered and how , that even when they are technically explained on a web site the consumer either does n't understand the terminology or just rushes past these important factors while focusing on a few bullet points and the monthly premium . I 've met entirely too many people this year who have come to regret the purchasing decision they made on their own and only learned the consequences of once they needed to use their coverage . So , do n't be that person . It does n't cost you anymore to use the services of a health insurance agent and you are making a decision that could literally have major implications for your personal and financial well being . Why would n't you seek out professional advice ?
When Congress created an income tax in 1913 , it exempted life insurance because life insurance was seen as a safety net for widows and orphans . Life insurance has expanded in its uses since then , from protecting businesses if a key employee dies , to being part of a financial plan for high wealth individuals . But at its core , life insurance protects people and businesses from financial loss as a result of death . And death is still one area that people hate to see exploited .
When you go to buy a life insurance policy online , you will run into a number of options . From the most to least automated , here are some of them . 1 -RRB- You put your information into an online application and your policy is issued within minutes . I have seen these websites come and go and am not sure how many exist online at this time . Premiums are comparatively high because they do little to no medical underwriting , and everyone may be lumped together at the same price . It puts a lot of responsibility on the individual to read the fine print . 2 -RRB- You enter your information online and get a quote . At this time , you fill out an application with an agent over the phone , or fill out the app online and then do a phone interview with the life insurance company . Because this type of policy digs a little deeper , premiums are more competitive . I like this option for people who are in a hurry or who hate to fill out paperwork . I do recommend at least talking to an agent before filling out the application with the company , as an agent can steer you in another direction if there is something in your profile that would cause you to be declined or rated up . 3 -RRB- You get a quote online , then email or talk to an agent to determine whether that is your best rate . Then you are mailed or emailed an application that you can complete and fax , mail or email back . There may or may not be an exam involved . At the end , you have a policy just like you would have had if you had gone to a local insurance office . This is a good choice for large face amounts and for people with health conditions . It allows us agents to be involved from the get go so that we can prevent problems and make sure the policy is issued at your best possible rate . The best part about buying life insurance online is being able to do it all from the comfort and convenience of your home . You can make it as automated or personal as you like . I hope the above helps you determine what option is best for you .
My sick sense of humor almost tempts me to say `` No , real estate agents are specifically excluded from getting health insurance by law '' but I wo n't do that . Yes , you can get health insurance . What you do for a living has no bearing on your eligibility for health insurance , especially now that ObamaCare is in full effect regarding guaranteed issuance of policies . In my experience , most real estate agents are self-employed/1099 contractor status people and not W2 employees of an agency . So , this probably means that you will need to get individual health insurance either through your state 's government health insurance marketplace or outside of it . So , just like you would tell those `` For Sale By Owner '' folks , you need to seek out an experienced health insurance agent who can assist you in obtaining coverage . If you have been without health insurance for more than 60-days and have n't had what is called a `` change of life status event '' -LRB- marriage , divorce , childbirth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- then you are in a time frame where you would be ineligible for enrollment in true major medical insurance until the next annual open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 and the earliest your coverage could go into effect would be for January 1st , 2015 . I hate to be the one to deliver this news but that is how ObamaCare works . Your only coverage option to carry you through until then would be to take out a Short Term Medical insurance plan . There are a variety of short term medical plan options available . However , you need to be aware that short term medical plans do still use limited underwriting questions , can decline a person for coverage and they do not cover pre-existing conditions . Please feel free to contact me if you need advice or assistance in this matter .
The where/who question is a great one !! Our belief at ' I Hate Buying Insurance ' is the UNDERWRITING is the tail that wags the dog -LRB- one of my fav southern sayings -RRB- . There are hundreds of options across the country for Term Life . Each carrier has a different underwriting appetite . Do you have 5 - 10 extra pounds to shed ? That will be a factor between when determining what health tier you qualify for . Most carrier have 4 tiers & are commonly called Standard , Standard Plus , Preferred , and Preferred Plus . Most life insurance shoppers understand that health plays a huge role in determining the `` rate '' you qualify for . Yet lifestyle , occupation , hobbies , family health history , & more play into the rate you qualify for . A top agency will work with dozens of carriers . What name , mascot , or even financial rating -LRB- do n't sweat A - vs. A + + -RRB- are all secondary to getting the best underwriting for your specific needs . One carrier may offer you Standard while a Preferred is available at a second . Another thing to consider as of this writing is a new generation of Term Life called `` Living Benefits Life '' -LRB- LBL -RRB- You DO N'T have to die to use you `` life '' insurance anymore . Several carriers offer the ability to accelerate when diagnosed with a range of Critical or Chronic Illnesses . Just think of it as accessing the bank vault early . If you were diagnosed with invasive cancer , would n't it be to get a large sum of cash to help pay for deductibles , time away from work , home health care , & travel to the hospital you need that is in a different state ? LBL life might just do all that for you My suggestion for shopping Term Life plans : 1 . If the agent or dot.com you call doesnt ask A LOT of questions about health , history , & lifestyle , RUN . All theyre doing is guessing . Accurate rates do NOT come from age , height/weight , & current tobacco use . The agent needs to interview you so youre matched with the right carrier . 2 . Dont be afraid to ask the agent , What underwriting factors lead you to this option vs. any other carrier ? 3 . See if the agent offers you a LBL option . IF NOT , it is my strong opinion that her/she is NOT on top of current trends . If an agent or dot.com is doing what is best for you , several ideas/options should be explored . If you have any questions or comments , reach out to us !
Yes , most people can get some type of life insurance policy if overweight , even if you are morbidly obese -LRB- do n't you hate that label -RRB- . There are a handful of companies that will provide first day coverage -LRB- no graded period -RRB- without any weight requirement at all . Most policies that disregard weight will have a graded period , where the death benefit paid during the first couple of years would be reduced for death due to natural causes . Some simplified issue polices -LRB- no exam needed -RRB- have very liberal weight charts . These can be a good choice , especially if you have not had your blood tested for a while . There are also some fully underwritten policies that have much more lenient weight charts than others . If you are applying for a large policy , certain companies can save you thousands of dollars . Be sure to contact an impaired risk or overweight life insurance expert for your life insurance if you are significantly overweight . Not only do you need a variety of choices , you need the experience of someone who knows how to maneuver the factors involved : weight changes over the past year , health conditions that can be associated with build , etc. .
Yes , there is life insurance that will cover someone with a stroke and diabetes . Since your stroke was over 2 years ago , there are some simplified issue policies that you can get , as long as you can do all your own ADL 's -LRB- activities of daily living -RRB- . If you are unable to bathe , dress , etc on your own , there are guaranteed issue policies that you can get . While some agents may suggest going the route with medical underwriting , my experience is that this option will not be available to you due to the combination of conditions . I hate to see people go through an extensive underwriting process , only to be declined . You will know the minute you apply whether or not the policies I mentioned will accept you . Sometimes that shot in the arm means as much as the coverage itself .
I am aware of carriers that use different companies in their company group to offer different rates for clients that are not necessarily available to the agency distribution channel . The different distribution develop rate experience that is independent from the other and may rise or fall independently so that rates for one is higher than another . Carriers using multi-channel distribution systems where they write business directly are probably following this model if they also have an agency channel . There are some large carriers doing this and you 'd recognize them if I were to blab . I do n't hate them enough to out them .
Yes , indeed they do . And the test is pretty reliable . Want to hear an interesting story ? A number of years ago I took an application from a client who disclosed that he did smoke cigarettes on a daily basis . So I quoted him smoker rates . He provided the lab specimens for the insurance exam and we all assumed they would show he was indeed a smoker . When the results came back , he had tested negative for nicotine even though he smoked every day ! Our assumption was he had a huge tolerance and it just didnt register in the lab . So , fair being fair , the underwriter gave him non-smoker rates ! And he paid about half as much as he would have as a smoker . Of course , smokers cant count on that always happening . They should expect to pay smoker rates . And most smokers hate paying that extra premium for that extra mortality risk . -LRB- And by the way - there is a huge amount of data to show that smoking does increase your mortality risk . Sorry . -RRB- So what should a smoker do ? Lie on the application ? I mean , who is really going to know if you say you dont smoke , and just go without cigarettes for a few weeks ? Your lab specimen should then come out clean , right ? Bad idea . Not good . Dont do it . That is insurance fraud , you know . You could jeopardize the claim getting paid . Besides which , this is not a game . Life insurance pricing has to accurately reflect the risk obligations taken on . If everybody scammed the system to get undercharged , then odds are the insurance carriers wouldnt have enough money to pay out benefit . Then everybodys beneficiaries would lose out . Not only that : there is something to be said for acting honorably , dont you think ? Your word should be your bond . What about postponing the purchase of the policy and waiting a year or two , so you can quit in the meantime and then qualify for non-smoker rates ? Well , okay , but who says youll be insurable at that point ? What if you come down with high blood pressure , high cholesterol , or high blood sugar , or any number of things that could throw the rates off ? Or even worse , make you ineligible for coverage at all ? Delaying is not worth the risk . Best thing to do is buy the policy now for the best smoker rates available . Keep it in force . Then , stop smoking . If you qualify for non-smoker rates , go for it . If you are eligible for a better rate , then good for you . But if you are not , then at least you have coverage . Either way , your beneficiaries will get what they need . Good move .
It is a love-hate relationship , mostly because the Medicare system is manipulated by politicians who blame doctors -LRB- and hospitals -RRB- for rising costs of Medicare . Medicare pays doctors less than private insurance carriers for treating patients . On average , about 20 % less . There is no reason for them to be happy about doing the same work for a Medicare patient as for one with private insurance but being forced to accept 20 % lower reimbursement .
To answer your question , you do not `` need '' to purchase disability insurance in Iowa . However , it may be something you want to purchase . statistics -LRB- we all hate them -RRB- show a person is more likely to have an accident outside of the workplace where work comp does not apply . Many employers have reduced expenses through cutting benefits and no longer offer disability . Check with your employer before looking for you own place if it is something you desire .
You would have to call the company that you have your coverage through if is not listed on your billing statement . I really hate to say this , but if you do n't know who your agent is then maybe it is time to find a new agent . You should be hearing from your agent once a year , if nothing else just so that they can make certain that you are still properly covered .
end question
start question
life-insurance
When Should You Stop Buying Term Life Insurance ?
You should stop buying term life insurance once your financial goals are met . If you are debt free , no loved one depends on your income , or your business would thrive without you , then it is probably time to stop buying term life insurance . It may also be time to consider either converting or purchasing cash value life insurance to protect your insurability and to have the flexibility to use the cash value funds for other things such as retirement or an unforeseen critical illness .
Some people use the term `` stop loss '' to mean `` maximum out-of-pocket exposures '' which is the point in a person 's health insurance policy when they 've met their deductible and any co-insurance cost sharing and the health insurance carrier becomes 100 % responsible for all health care costs after that point . Technically this is an incorrect use of the term . Stop loss traditionally refers to reinsurance arrangements within self-insured group health insurance plans . There are two types of stop loss insurance , specific and aggregate . Specific stop loss insurance protects the group plan from claims exposure above a certain point for any insured person in the group . For example , a $ 50,000 specific stop loss policy means the employer accepts the risk for the first $ 50,000 in claims on an individual and after that point the reinsurance carrier pays the rest of the cost . Aggregate stop loss insurance protects the employer from claims liability for the entire insured group above a certain point . A $ 1 million aggregate stop loss policy means the employer accepts the liability for the first $ 1 million in claims for their entire insured group , if the group 's claims exceed this limit then the aggregate reinsurance carrier pays the rest of the cost .
When should you stop buying life insurance ? When you find the policy that works for your situation and planning . The idea of buying policy after policy has a risk attached to it . A person 's health can change over time making insurability suspect later . If a person is going to decide to purchase a policy and then drop it and start another , they should always buy convertible term because a day will come where moving to another policy may not work .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
How about today ? There are many creative ways to fund your life insurance policy . Lets suppose you have term insurance with 10 years left on the premium guarantee . You could , of course , just keep paying the premium for those 10 years . If the carrier doesnt get those 10 years of premium payments , you will lose the coverage . Is there any way you could stop paying but still retain the guarantee ? Yes , there is . You might be able to use a single premium immediate annuity to fund the policy . Make one payment into the annuity , and the annuity will , in turn , pay your insurance premium for you . Depending on your age and other factors , the amount of money you put into that annuity could very well be substantially less than the total premium you would end up paying for the next 10 years . This way you could stop making premium payments after that one annuity contribution , but still retain your guaranteed coverage . Now lets suppose you have a universal life policy . I am sure you know that this is a flexible premium product . You could overpay , underpay , and even stop paying . Of course , you need to know what you are doing here to make sure you will have the coverage you need for as long as you need it . Given that , you might be able to plop one lump sum into that policy now and never have to make another payment and still get the guarantees you want . All you need is for the carrier to do a simple calculation and illustration for you . Here again , you could stop making payments but still retain the coverage . There are many ways to skin a cat , as they say . Not that I think cats should be skinned at all - but you know what I mean :-RRB-
A stop loss means exactly what it implies , `` it stops your loss '' and the insurance carrier picks up all other costs during that calendar year . For individuals that have health insurance a stop loss is also known as the annual out-of-pocket maximum . After you reach the out-of-pocket maximum in a calendar year the insurance carrier pays the rest of the claims . In a self-insurance situation where a company pays the claims up to a certain dollar amount the `` stop loss '' is the most the employer will pay in any year after which the insurance carrier will pay the remaining claims .
Stopping a term life insurance policy is fairly easy . The best and preferred way to stop coverage is to write your life insurance company requesting to cancel . All correspondence must be in writing to protect both parties , never just call and cancel . You will receive a confirmation . Most life insurance companies will allow you to reinstate , or change your mind , up to 180 days by paying back premiums . After that time period you will have to reapply for coverage . The second way to cancel a term life policy is to stop paying your premiums . The policy will lapse after your 31 day grace period . While this method is maybe the easiest , you will receive a lot of correspondence from the carrier , warning the lapse of your policy . It is always best just to write , mail , scan or fax your request and be done .
Buy life insurance when you are ready to make a commitment . A commitment to whom , you say ? A commitment to the beneficiary . If the policy would be for personal use , that means to your spouse . Do n't buy the policy until you 're ready to make sure his or her future is secure . If the policy is for business use , then do n't buy the policy until you are ready to make sure the business is secure . If the policy is to be used as a charitable gift , then do n't buy the policy until you are ready to make sure that the charity close to your heart is secure . Why is commitment important here ? Because without it , a life insurance premium payment becomes just another bill . But , your life insurance policy is different . To get it , you will have to go through underwriting that is more thorough than anything else you will have experienced . Your current health ; medical history ; family medical history ; job ; hobbies ; travel habits ; and legal , financial , and motor vehicle records will have to be reviewed . Once you are approved for coverage , the only way you can lose it is if you stop making those payments . You would not want to go through that again if it could be avoided . If you remain committed to the security of your beneficiary , you will make sure that payment is always made . If you are ready for this today , then buy it today .
Paid up value in life insurance is a non-forfeiture provision which is found in most classic whole life insurance policies . Non-forfeitureprovisions are a series of values found within a life policy that give you options if you want to stop making premium payments on your policy . These options are : Cash Surrender : Giving up or selling your policy back to the insurance company for the amount of cash value accumulated within your policy over the years you own it . These values are stated on a chart called Non-forfeiture Provisions contained within your policy . Extended Term Insurance : This provides for the continuation of the full face amount of your policy for a specified period of time based on the amount of cash value accumulated within your policy . The length of time is stated in the same chart listed as non-forfeiture provisions . Paid-up Insurance Value : This provision also is included the the chart of Non-forfeiture provisions and it lists the new face amount of insurance you can elect if you stop making premium payments for the policy . It is based on the cash surrender value of the policy at the time you stop making premium payments . Depending on the length of time the policy is in force this amount may equal the full face amount of the policy , and this amount will be in force for the rest of your life . There are policies that can be purchased with a date where the policy is fully paid up , such as a 20 year payment life , or a life paid up at age 65 . Generally these policies spread a lifetime of premium payments over a shorter period of time making the premium payments slightly more than a traditional whole life policy where premium payments are paid for the life of the insured , and are typically known as a limited payment life policy .
You should buy Term Life insurance if you have a temporary situation that would turn out badly if you were to pass within the next x number of years -LRB- the x being the number of years for which you should get the Term policy -RRB- . E.g. . You are saving money to send your two children to college . They are age 10 and 12 . You just got a promotion and anticipate being able to put away $ 1,000 / month for their college education . This should enable them to get into most schools and you are feeling good about that . But suddenly your company closes its doors . Or you are diagnosed with a serious illness that requires expensive treatment and forces you to stop working for months . Or the ultimate tragedy , you pass away . There is no need to explain how difficult it could be for your family to function for the next years , much less save up for college . Relatively inexpensive , 15 year Term Life insurance could have taken care of all of that . If you are in good health and able to pay an affordable price , and if you have any temporary needs in your home or business , Term Life insurance can be a value beyond measure .
With Term life insurance , if you stop paying premiums for over one month , the policy will lapse . To get that same policy back you have to fill out a reinstatement application saying that your health has not changed , and you have to pay back premiums to when you quit paying them . If your health has changed or you are unable/unwilling to pay that amount , you will need to apply for a new policy . There is no cash value and no surrender charge . When you stop paying the premium for cash value product such as Whole life or Universal life , the cash in the policy may pay the premiums until the cash value runs out . If you would rather take the cash value out in cash , or roll it over into another policy , or change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , you must contact your agent or the life insurance company and give them those instructions .
Employee supplemental term life insurance is a provision to purchase more term life insurance through your group life insurance plan . Usually the employer will pay for a certain amount of group term life on the employee and the supplemental allows the employee to purchase additional face amount at the employee cost . While group term life is a nice perk from an employer a healthy employee can purchase term life insurance on their own at a more affordable rate and they own the policy . As Ted mentioned , if you leave the company you lose your coverage . Whereas if you purchase your own term life policy no one can take that coverage away from you unless you stop paying premiums or the term expires . It is much more sound protection plan . If you are unhealthy and can not qualify for affordable term life insurance , then supplemental term life can be the temporary answer to a prayer of having enough life insurance protection for your loved ones . Contact an independent life insurance broker in order to properly weigh your options .
Term life insurance is good to pay large expenses that only last for a set length of time . A mortgage , small business loan , or tuition loan are some large liabilities that most people do not have the money saved up to pay off , if they should die prematurely . But they are expenses that will not last forever . Therefore , Term insurance is a low cost way to cover those large debts for a set period of time , without breaking the bank . Another thing Term insurance is good for is raising a family . I recommend purchasing Term insurance long enough to get the youngest child to at least age 23 . Not in every case , but generally , I feel that Term insurance is not good for small face amounts . Most people who rely on life insurance to cover small debts , will also need life insurance to cover their final expenses . There are so many reasonably priced Whole Life policies that can be purchased in very small face amounts , and for persons of all type of health . And you can really save a lot of money on those policies by buying them at a younger age . Some can be paid up in a set number of years , and some have such good cash value that , if you decided to stop paying on the policy in the future , you would still have a decent sized paid up policy to hold onto . Of course , Term Life is also not good for any need that does not end until death . E.g. Funeral costs , paying estate settlement costs , passing money to grandchildren , etc. . Unless you know that you will have a large stream of money in the future so that you can afford to convert your Term insurance to permanent later on , you are usually better off just buying Whole Life or guaranteed no lapse Universal Life , to start with , for needs that do not end until death . Those are my general opinions on what Term Life Insurance is good for , and what it is not so good for . There are many exceptions as each person 's situation is different and policies can be set up to accomplish different purposes . Please do not hesitate to give me a call if you 'd like to discuss this in person .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Stop loss is normally a term used in self funded employer group health plans but I have heard the phrase used to describe traditional major medical plans as well . Your stop loss is the point where -LRB- at least in theory -RRB- your liability for paying out of pocket ceases and the carrier pays 100 % of future covered claims . This only works in a practical matter in the case of a high deductible health plan -LRB- HDHP -RRB- where eligible claims are covered at 100 % once the deductible is satisfied . If you have a copay plan you can satisfy your major medical deductible and then hit your out of pocket coinsurance limit -LRB- stop loss -RRB- but still be responsible for paying claims for doctor visits , Rx and other items .
If you stop paying life insurance premiums for Term life insurance , your policy will lapse after a one month grace period . There will be no penalty charged and you will receive no money back , unless you took out Return of Premium -LRB- ROP -RRB- Term insurance , in which you may be able to get some of your premiums back if you kept the policy long enough . If you stop paying premiums on Whole Life or Universal Life , the cash value of the policy may continue to pay the premiums for a while . If you want to take the cash out , you need to notify the life insurance company or your agent that you are dropping your policy . And once that runs out , your policy will lapse -LRB- quit providing coverage -RRB- .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
You can stop term life insurance in one of two ways . First , you could just stop paying premiums . The policy will go into it 's grace period then lapsing after that , about 30 days . The second is to write a letter to the insurance company notifying them of your intentions effective and a date you choose . I always caution people about canceling any life insurance . You will most likely pay more premiums when you go to apply for more insurance . Also , insurability could be an issue if your health is worse at the time of application or the history has issues in it .
There are specified `` guarantee issue '' situations where a supplemental Medicare insurance carrier can not refuse coverage . Most people will buy a Medicare supplement plan at the same time they enroll in Medicare Part A and Part B which is usually when they turn 65 . If you buy a supplement plan then , you can not be denied . Other guaranteed issue periods include exercising your trial right when leaving a Medicare Adantage plan , losing your Advantage plan coverage by moving out of the service area and if your current Medigap carriar goes out of business or stops writing your plan .
All great answers ... My 4 cents -LRB- I ca n't add just TWO hehehe -RRB- ... Stop buying life insurance ! What I mean is the old `` death insurance '' plan that everyone knows . You die , someone gets a check . Great ... . If you die . More often than ever before , we survive the cancer , heart attack , stroke , or other critical illness . What use to just kill us now only kills us financially . There is a new generation of life insurance that you can use without DYING . Commonly called Living Benefits Life -LRB- LBL -RRB- Insurance , these plans may allow you to tap into the `` death benefit '' upon the diagnosis of a named critical illness -LRB- like cancer or a heart attack -RRB- , or when you 're not able to perform 2 of 6 activities of daily living -LRB- ADL -RRB- . SO your `` death insurance '' can act like a long term care policy ! Talk to an agent that represents several LBL plans . UNDERWRITING is key . Buy the best plan that you can qualify for . You buy life insurance with your health ... you only pay for it with dollars . If you have questions ... Reach out ! - gravy .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is Medicare Long Term Care Insurance ?
Technically , no . Medicare was designed to help the elderly pay for acute sickness and accidents from whichone can heal relatively quickly . It does not cover chronic illness or prolonged rehabilitation from an accident . However , Medicare will provide payment of costs for some `` short-term '' recovery for the elderly that are enrolled in Medicare part A & B . There are prequalifications and limitations to what it will pay for , how much it will pay , the type of care it will pay for , and for how long -LRB- maximum of 100 days -RRB- . Payment for long-term care is usually paid out of pocket , or by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . To receive payment for care from the latter , one must be `` impoverished '' as defined by the state that they live in , and they usually must be in a facility -LRB- Medicaid/Medical only pay a few hundred dollars a month of home care -RRB- . The only other solution to the problem of paying for long-term care , either at home or in a facility , is long-term care insurance -LRB- LTCi -RRB- . This sector of the health insurance industry is in a bit of turmoil right now and if you have decided that you want to explore LTCi , make sure that you work with someone that is a specialist in this area . There are an infinite number of designs in coverage which can vary the cost -LRB- premium -RRB- by thousands of dollars a year . Also , be sure that you are working with agents that only work with the best LTCi companies in the industry , those that have strong financials , high ratings , and are committed to the field . The most important thing is to have a plan . Your plan may or may not include LTCi . But , if it does , buy no later than your mid-fifties as the price really starts to climb after that . Dont depend on Medicare for the payment of long-term care costs .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
The main disadvantages of Long Term Care insurance would be that you would die before you were able to use it or that you would be blessed with a long and healthy life and never need long term care before you passed away . Other than that the disadvantages are that it is becoming more expensive and that fewer insurance carriers are offering Long Term Care insurance . Of course , the reasons for this are testimony to the need for long term care insurance , people are living longer and therefore more people are having some period of need for long term care and long term care facilities are getting more expensive .
A Medigap policy , also known as a Medicare Supplement policy is exactly that . It pays for many of the bills left over after Medicare has paid their share . However , they do n't normally pay anything if Medicare does n't pay first . Some Medigap plans also have some long term care benefits added . You should check with an insurance broker for your state to see what is offered where you are . Medicare only pays for a certain number of days in long-term care . Once those days are up , you are responsible for the rest of the bills . Long term care insurance is used to pay for this sort of situation . Normally , it will start paying a set number of days after you begin to need long term care , and continues until you have used up the money in the plan . Medicare and Medigap pay for the first part of your long term care , then LTC insurance takes over .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
In addition to the above comments , the family benefits . Average cost for a nursing home in the US , paid for long term care , usually in the range of $ 6,000.00 per month . An estate can be quickly depleted by the cost of long term care . Many people believe that Medicare pays for long term care , quite the opposite . Medicare pays only for the first 20 days . Medicaid pays for long term care , however you have to spend down any assets to qualify for Medicaid benefits . Long term care policies also come with a `` ROP '' or Return of Premium rider , a great option to consider when thinking about a long term care policy . Underwriting can be more challenging to overcome than the price of the policy .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Which Health Insurance Is Most Popular ?
Having worked in the health insurance business for over 35 years I can tell you the most popular health insurance plan is usually the one that delivers the least value and does n't work well when you need it the most . Popular plans have doctor and Rx copay 's but often only cover a few drugs . Popular plans have a lot of moving parts and an unpredictable maximum out of pocket .
It depends on where you live and what you mean by most popular . Some area 's have local HMO 's that are very popular in that area . As far as size United Health Care insures more people worldwide than any other company . Anthem / Blue Cross Blue Shield , Aetna , Humana are also large companies on a national level that are very popular .
With more than 34 years of experience in the HSA/Health insurance business , I 'm happy to offer my expert and unbiased answer . Although the average deductible has substantially increased over the last 30 years , the popularity of the HSA concept is here ... and here to stay . High Deductible Health Insurance plans -LRB- HSA -RRB- are very popular for individuals and families that want quality medical coverage from reputable companies , but at a rate they can afford . Even with the passage of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- aka Obamacare -RRB- , the popularity of HSA accounts has increased . But what about the future of these types of plans ? Their popularity is not likely to decrease , since health insurance costs keep increasing , and there is no other type of coverage that can offer a combination of network-negotiated discounts and paying for healthcare , dental , and vision expenses with tax-free dollars . However , as our political landscape changes , be prepared for unanticipated changes ! As we move closer to 2017 and 2018 , many legislative changes are planned . These changes could impact the cost of coverage and the amount of federal subsidy that is received . Both the group sector and individual sector could be adversely affected . So ... Expect HSAs to continue to be a popular and `` normal '' choice to consider for individuals , families , and small and large businesses . Answer provided by Edward Harris , one of the nation 's premier healthcare authorities . Edward is the owner of majormedicalhealth.com , where consumers can compare the best health insurance rates from top-rated companies .
Having worked in the health insurance business for over 35 years I can tell you the most popular health insurance plan is usually the one that delivers the least value and does n't work well when you need it the most . Popular plans have doctor and Rx copay 's but often only cover a few drugs . Popular plans have a lot of moving parts and an unpredictable maximum out of pocket .
It depends on where you live and what you mean by most popular . Some area 's have local HMO 's that are very popular in that area . As far as size United Health Care insures more people worldwide than any other company . Anthem / Blue Cross Blue Shield , Aetna , Humana are also large companies on a national level that are very popular .
I do n't know if there are any statistics on the most popular Medigap aka Medicare Supplement plan . I believe it is probably Plan F or G , which are provide the most comprehensive coverage . Plan F covers the $ 147 Part B deductible , while Plan G does not . They are also the only plans that cover the Part B excess billing . The most popular Insurance Carrier and premiums will vary by age and state . Please contact me if you require any additional information .
A Medigap plan , also known as Medicare Supplement insurance , is sold by private companies to help off-set the cost of some health care expenses not covered by Original Medicare does n't cover , like co-payments , coinsurance , and deductibles . One other huge benefit of any Medigap plan is the extension of your hospital coverage -LRB- paid under Medicare Part A -RRB- by an additional 365 days . Some Medigap policies also offer additional coverage for services that Original Medicare does not cover , such as medical care when you travel outside the U.S. . If you have Original Medicare and you buy a Medigap policy , Medicare will pay its share of the Medicare-approved amount for covered health care costs . Then your Medigap policy pays its share . In most states , there are ten standardized Medigap plans , known by letters A through M. Regardless of that state in which you reside , or the company you purchase Plan A will always provide the exact same coverage as any other Plan A . The most popular plan is F , which covers 100 % of all patient cost sharing for Medicare-covered expenses . Plan G is also a popular option , often significantly cheaper than Plan F , with almost the exact same coverage -LRB- G covers everything F does , expect your Medicare Part B deductible -RRB- .
The most popular Medicare Supplement insurance policy is Medigap Plan F ; however , Medigap Plan G is right on the heels of Plan F. Plan F is popular because of the comprehensive health care coverage it provides . It will cover all your Medicare approved charges not paid by Original Medicare Part A and Part B . This means you do not have to worry about co-insurance , deductibles or co-pays . Plan G is gaining popularity because it strongly resembles Plan F . The only difference is you have to satisfy the annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 2014 -RRB- before your Part B benefits kick in . Once you 've met the deductible , your Plan G acts just like Plan F . Why would someone choose Plan G over Plan F ? Price . You can often find Plan G at a lower premium ... even when you include the cost of the Part B deductible . To determine which Medigap Plan is right for you it 's a great idea to speak with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . There are a number of insurance companies that offer Medigap Plan F and Plan G. Often , the best premiums are with the companies you do not see online . If I can be of assistance with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
The greatest strength of universal life , its flexibility , also gives rise to its potential for disappointment if the policy was not set up properly or is not managed for the inevitable changes in life . Universal life took off in popularity in the early 1980s because , unlike whole life , it featured flexible premiums , adjustable death benefits , unbundled components which clearly disclosed policy charges and credits and dynamic interest crediting which reflected competitive interest rates . The universal life product type remains popular to this day but with flexibility comes risks of planning to pay premiums when interest rates are high which are too low when interest rates fall , as is the case today . Skipping premiums also presents a risk that the cash value may not remain high enough later to maintain the policy . Over time , all policies must be managed . We recommend a policy review by your life insurance professional at least every three years or sooner to ensure the policy is properly maintained and to adapt where necessary to changes that occur .
The simple answer is , the best plan is the one that fits your needs and budget . Each Modernized Medigap plan is unique . Every carrier offers plan F. Most will offer a choice of half a dozen or so . In my opinion you should only seriously consider D , F , G , N and Hi F . The other plans do n't offer enough value to even be considered . Plan D is popular in some states but not in others . There are minor differences in D and G. Assuming you have moved beyond considering F , compare pricing and benefits of these two plans . Plan F is popular in most states , mostly because it is the one promoted heavily by carriers and agents . There is a reason for that . Plan F is the easiest to explain , but it also has the highest premium which means agents pushing plan F may be motivated more by what it does for them vs. considering your needs . Roughly 90 % of my clients opt for plan G . The value is obvious and the premium savings can be dramatic when compared to plan F. Plans N and Hi F are most often considered by those on a tight budget and those who do not want to give up the freedom to choose any doctor . All plans with the same letter are identical in every way ... except for the premium you pay . When you pay more you do n't get more , you simply paid too much . #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
A health insurance allwance is a type of defined contribution employer benefit plan.This type of benefit is usually structured into a Premium Reinbursment Account or a PRA which is basically a form of a Health Reinbursment Account or a HRA . Basically a PRA will be set up by employers who do not offer their employees traditional group health insurance options , and will consist of a flat monthly contribution to each eligible employee that is used to pay for part or all of the premiums for individual health/ancillary coverage . This practice will most likely see a large reduction in popularity because of PPACA regulations . This is because PRA 's do not qualify as qualified health plans offering minimum essential coverage , which means that in the eyes of the government the employer is not offering health insurance and therefore can still be penalized . Also one of the great benefits to a PRA was the pre-tax funding that escaped payroll taxes and lowered the businesses total tax liability . This feature has been eliminated by healthcare reform , which only allows such PRA funding arraingements on a post tax basis .
As far as I know , any carrier that offers Medicare supplement plans in your state will also include plan F. For a lot of reasons , Medigap plan F is the most popular plan sold -LRB- and purchased -RRB- . Every statistic I have seen shows Medicare supplement plan F participation in excess of 50 % and usually closer to 70 % . In other words , for every 100 Medicare supplement plans bought in a state , 50 - 70 are plan F . While F is the most popular plan , it does not mean it has the best value . Most of my Georgia Medicare supplement clients purchase plan G and enjoy saving $ 300 or more each year vs. what they were paying for plan F with another carrier .
Most term life insurance companies have guaranteed level death benefits and premiums for a specified number of years . For example , 10 , 15 , 20 and 30 years are the most popular plans . There are some carriers that issue reducing term plans -LRB- often purchased to cover a mortgage -RRB- although they are not as popular as they were in the 80s and 90s .
Medicare gap insurance , Medicare supplement insurance , Medigap ... all the same . Like Kleenex and tissue , the terms are interchangeable . Medigap plan F is the easiest to explain . It covers everything approved by Medicare Part A and Part B but not paid by Medicare . Plan F covers deductibles , copay 's , coinsurance . Other plans -LRB- A - N -RRB- cover something less than F but most are comprehensive . Plan F is the most popular , purchased by about half of those who buy Medicare supplement plans . Plan G is next followed by plan N . The other plans are considerably less popular .
In order to determine what plan is best for you , I would need to know more about you such as your age , gender , any tobacco usage , married or single -LRB- determines availability of a household discount on rates -RRB- , medical history -LRB- if outside open enrollment period -RRB- , and other factors to provide accurate figures and suggest a proper course of action that best serves your needs . For the overall populace , the most comprehensive -LRB- and most popular -RRB- Medigap plan is plan F as it covers all Medigap benefits at 100 % . Plan G is the second most popular plan because it 's identical to plan F except it does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . So how do you decide between the two ? It comes down to price . Since Medigap policies are standardized -LRB- meaning a plan F from company A is the exact same plan F from company B -RRB- , the only difference between the coverages is the price you pay for them . With the only difference between plans F and G , if the annualized premiums total more than a difference of $ 147 , then plan G offers you the better deal - if the total is less than $ 147 , then plan F is the better deal . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any questions , including quote requests , plan comparisons . Thanks very much .
The most popular Medigap plan is Plan F because it 's the most comprehensive and covers all of the benefits at 100 % from day 1 . Plan G is the second most popular plan because it 's identical to plan F except it does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- , but the premiums are typically much lower than plan F . So how do you decide between the two ? It comes down to price . Since Medigap policies are standardized -LRB- meaning a plan F from company A is the exact same plan F from company B -RRB- , the only difference between the coverages is the price you pay for them . With the only difference between plans F and G , if the annualized premiums total more than a difference of $ 147 , then plan G offers you the better deal - if the total is less than $ 147 , then plan F is the better deal . In order to determine what plan is best for you , I would need to know more about you such as your age , gender , any tobacco usage , married or single -LRB- determines availability of a household discount on rates -RRB- , medical history -LRB- if outside open enrollment period -RRB- , and other factors to provide accurate figures and suggest a proper course of action that best serves your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any questions , including quote requests , plan comparisons . Thanks very much .
The best Medicare supplement plan -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan is the one that fits your own needs and budget . All Medicare supplement insurance plans with the same letter are identical in every way except price and there truly is no `` best '' company ... in spite of what some may tell you . Medigap plan F is the most popular , mostly because it is oversold . Far too many agents promote the plan because it is easy to explain . It is also the most expensive plan . I recently spoke with a couple that had a Medicare supplement plan F from a very well known carrier . The wife was quite adamant that she had shopped around and `` company M '' had the best rate . I did not want to argue , but I offered that , over the last 4 years I had sold maybe 3 policies with that carrier and it was only because the client insisted on buying from them . Then we compared rates on my most popular plan and discovered they could save over $ 1700 per year by switching plans . There is no single `` best '' plan or `` best '' carrier , but likewise there is no reason to pay more than you have to . #GeorgiaMedicarePlans
You can still be turned down for health insurance and it happens each day . There are many non-Exchange plans that are offered by major insurers that are medically-underwritten . For example , short-term -LRB- temporary -RRB- medical coverage is available fro many large reputable carriers . UnitedHealthcare markets this type of plan under `` Golden Rule . '' It 's a very popular and cheap health insurance plan that can be purchased for up to 6-12 months . Although there are only a few medical questions , you can be denied coverage if you have been treated for a major illness -LRB- cancer , heart disease , diabetes etc. . . -RRB- or you have previously been turned down for coverage . If this happens to you , do n't miss the next Open Enrollment which allows you to apply with a subsidy that could lower your rate . Limited-Benefit plans are also a less-popular option . As an experienced broker -LRB- 33 years -RRB- , our job is to provide accurate information and the lowest available rates .
The best Medicare supplement plan in Oklahoma is the one that meets your needs and budget . Medigap plan F is the most popular plan , but you should consider all options rather than just picking based on popularity . Understand that all Medicare supplement plans with the same letter are identical in every way except price .
There really is not a `` Number 1 '' health insurance company in the US . Although UnitedHealthcare , Aetna , Wellpoint and Cigna are among the largest companies , everyone 's opinion regarding who is the `` best '' insurer will vary . For example , in Pennsylvania , Independence Blue Cross and Highmark are very popular . In Ohio , Medical Mutual is quite popular . So naturally , where you live will greatly influence your opinion .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is The Cheapest Website For Car Insurance ?
The cheapest website for car insurance ? As an experienced car broker -LRB- 33 years -RRB- , naturally , I am biased to my own top-rated website . However , in fairness , there are many reputable and reliable websites that offer competitive prices . However , it 's important to utilize a resource that constantly updates information and provided accurate rates .
The company that has the cheapest life insurance in California depends on the age and health of the applicant , and the type of life insurance policy . The cheapest price of term life insurance for someone who is young and very health will be from a company different from the company offering the cheapest price for a senior person looking for a whole life final expense policy . To find the cheapest life insurance policy for you , go to a website that offers instant life insurance quotes in California and input your date of birth , height , weight and health information . That will show you the lowest price policy for your particular age and health .
The cheapest website for car insurance ? As an experienced car broker -LRB- 33 years -RRB- , naturally , I am biased to my own top-rated website . However , in fairness , there are many reputable and reliable websites that offer competitive prices . However , it 's important to utilize a resource that constantly updates information and provided accurate rates .
The cheapest life insurance in Wisconsin varies according to who is applying . For someone who is young and perfectly healthy , there are many companies that offer rates within cents of one another , with SBLI often coming out lowest . When a health condition is involved , you can not just look at price ; you have to look at how the company will rate you . Different carriers have the cheapest rates for those with diabetes , MS , heart disease , etc. . And a whole other set of companies has the best rates for older persons looking for final expense policies . To find the cheapest rate for you , contact an agency that is contracted to sell life insurance in Wisconsin and give them your health details . You can start by using an online quoter that allows you to enter some health details and then call that website , if you like . That way you will be sure to get YOUR cheapest life insurance rates in Wisconsin .
The cost of Critical Care Insurance varies according to the age of the applicant , whether or not they use tobacco , their BMI , if they have a family history of certain illnesses , and whether they themselves have any health conditions . Therefore , what is the cheapest Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan for one person , may not be the cheapest for another . To find the cheapest quote for you , go to a website that offers Critical Illness Insurance in Michigan and call or visit them .
The cheapest car insurance for new drivers depends upon where you live , what type of vehicle you drive , how man tickets and accidents you have , and the type of coverage you want . An experienced broker with a top-rated website -LRB- That 's what we do best ! -RRB- saves customers up to 45 % in premiums by shopping and comparing the best available options . So to get the best rates and find the cheapest policy , utilize a broker . It 's free and you 'll save time and money .
What is the best and cheapest life insurance to buy ? Well , the best would be the life insurance that is in force when you die . The fact that it is in force makes it the best , because it does n't matter what company if you 're policy is not in force when you die . As for the cheapest ? Cheapest for how long ? One day ? one year ? a lifetime ? The best price is really determined by the length of your need . One day ? term . One year ? term . A lifetime ? Whole life . Term is the cheapest for the shortest amount of time and whole life is the cheapest for the longest period of time .
There is no one company that has the cheapest life insurance in Iowa for every person . Some companies specialize in life insurance for those with certain health conditions . Some have the cheapest rates for those who want a quick policy without having to take an exam . Others have the lowest rates for those with perfect health , but the competition for those is so strong that many companies ' rate are within cents apart . To get the cheapest life insurance rate for you , go to a website that offers a quote engine that quotes Iowa life insurance rates . The one that comes up on top will most likely be your best price .
The cheapest car insurance for young drivers depends on many factors including your age , type of vehicle , driving record and where you live . An experienced broker , along with their website will provide you with the best chance of getting the best rates . That 's our job - Finding the cheapest prices from the most reputable companies .
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
The cheapest car insurance for new drivers will vary , depending where you live and the type of car you drive . But you could easily save hundreds -LRB- or thousands -RRB- of dollars per year by choosing the right company . That 's what an experienced broker will do for you . Shop , compare and find the lowest rates and save time , money and frustration ! LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Top car insurance broker for more than 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites .
The cheapest car insurance rates in Georgia can be easily found with the help of an experienced broker . That 's what we do best ! -LRB- Along with our top-rated websites -RRB- Among the factors that determine prices are your age , the type of car you own , your coverage and your driving record . Although carriers such as State Farm , Farmers , Liberty Mutual , Esurance , Progesssive and Geico are typically quite competitive , it 's important to shop the right way . Among the cities with the lowest rates , usually , Valdosta , Athens , Brunswick , Cummings and Clayton offer the best pricing . However , specific ages and different types of cars will make a difference in all situations .
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
The exact price depends on what state and county you are living in , but your cheapest option other than the fine , will be a catastrophic plan . Catastrophic plans carry high deductible and out of pocket expenses , but is the lowest level and cheapest insurance option available . I highly recommend you find a local licensed and certified health insurance broker that can shop around for you , for both plans inside and outside of the new exchanges . They will also be able to advise and assist you with premium assistance applications to help pay for the insurance . Plus they can save you the time and headache of trying to get on the glitchy government website yourself , and getting frustrated . And the bonus , their service does n't cost you anything , so why not use an agent or broker !!! But , do n't get to stressed yet , you have until March 31st , 2014 to shop around and purchase a plan , to avoid the penalty .
The cheapest health insurance rates in Iowa will be typically offered by one of the approved carriers on the Marketplace , which was created because of recent legislation . Coventry Health Care and CoOportunity Health will feature individual plans to individuals and families through the Exchange -LRB- Marketplace -RRB- and expect statewide coverage . Other participating companies will be Avera , Gunderson , Sanford and Health Alliance Midwest . So how do you apply for a policy or compare prices ? An experienced broker -LRB- along with their website -RRB- can shop for the best rates , show you the best options and discuss your federal subsidy that could potentially reduce your premium quite a bit . As a broker for more than 30 years , our focus is to help consumers navigate the healthcare waters -LRB- in Iowa or other states -RRB- so they can find the cheapest plans , but also understand what they are purchasing .
The best and cheapest health insurance will be different for each person . For example , if you are under 25 and have a few tickets , a specific insurer may be the best option . However , if you are married and live in another state , a completely different company may be the best option . To get the cheapest rate , I , as an experienced broker , shop all of the major companies so you can quickly compare the most affordable options . Then , you , or any consumer , can quickly determine the company to apply with and secure coverage . The combination of an experienced broker and top-rated website saves money !
The best car insurance for young drivers is the policy that is the cheapest , but still offers the coverage you need . Of course , a reputable company should always be used . Experienced brokers -LRB- preferably in the business at least 20 years -RRB- and our websites are a great tool for any person needing auto insurance coverage . Of course , rates vary , depending on many factors including driving record and type of car to be insured .
If you go to a website that offers free , instant life insurance quotes from multiple companies , you can enter some factors -LRB- date of birth , gender , term length , face amount , etc -RRB- and see which life insurance companies have the lowest quotes . If there were no questions about build or health , you are most likely viewing quotes for the best rate class , which may not be the class you qualify for . But that exercise does give you an idea of which companies offer the cheapest rates for term insurance for those in perfect health . Keep in mind that being overweight , having a health condition , or being older will probably result in other companies offering the cheapest rates . To find the lowest priced term life insurance rates for you , it is best to call an agent so that they can gather all these variables and do the shopping for you .
Who has the cheapest life insurance rates ? It 's going to depend on what gender , what face amount , what duration and even what payment mode ... Actually the cheapest life insurance rates are really dependent upon the applicant 's good health . Your `` discounts '' on premiums for life insurance come from your good health .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
What Is Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan ?
A supplementae executive retirement plan or SERP is a form of non-qualified deferred compensation . Since the planned is non-qualified , the employer has the ability to select who participate in the plan -LRB- i.e. they can choose to offer such a plan only to a select number of employees and do not have to make the offer to everyone -RRB- . Traditionally the plans are set up as additional retirement benefits to an employee who is highly coveted by the employer . The plans are used as an incentive to keep certain key employees and disuade them from leaving the employer . The retirement benefits offered under the plan are only payable to the employee if he or she stays at the employer for a certain period of time , which can be a rather longer period of time .
The most common understanding of a supplemental executive retirement plan is one contributes to a permanent cash value plan : Participating Whole Life , Current Assumption Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Variable Universal Life . Product suitability needs to match up to the policy owners financial profile and risk tolerance . The policy design is critical to the cash accumulation , using the lowest cost of insurance option that complies with TAMRA . The most popular supplemental plan is a 162 Executive Bonus Arrangement .
Cash value life insurance products are frequently used as a retirement planning vehicle . Most nonqualified retirement plans , from the largest to the smallest companies in America , use life insurance to informally fund the retirement payments companies make to their retiring executives . So , it would stand to reason that what works for those arrangements can work for individuals , too ! With the right products , an experienced life insurance professional can design a supplemental retirement plan using life insurance to provide income in retirement , tax free -LRB- through policy loans -RRB- . Whole life is not always the best choice in terms of efficiency and flexibility . Universal life based products are better , in my experience .
Bank owned life insurance -LRB- BOLI -RRB- allows banks to obtain better after tax return on assets than tier 1 capital . The bank is owner and beneficiary of the life insurance , not bank executives . Regulations have tightened in recent years and banks must have a legitimate reason to own life insurance on the lives of highly compensated executives of the bank . BOLI is usually set up to informally fund nonqualified benefit plans for selected executives . The executive is an insured in these policies but has no ownership interest . The executive 's family not a beneficiary of the policy though the nonqualified benefit agreements may have death benefit provisions which are income taxable to them unlike a life insurance policy death benefit . Though not BOLI , split dollar arrangements have reemerged which can overcome most BOLI shortcomings and allow both the bank and the executive to directly participate in and benefit from a life insurance contract .
A SERP is a Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan generally for key executives in a company . Employers who wish to retain the services of important employees use deferred compensation plans as golden handcuffs to secure their employment into the future . SERPs generally have a vesting schedule over a time certain period described in the arrangement .
Deferred compensation plans are generally an additional executive retirement plan when a qualified plan contributions have reached their maximum . Although the employer ca n't deduct the plan until the employee 's retirement date , the plan generally has a vesting schedule that can be a golden handcuff to the key executive to stay on until it 's fully vested . The plans accumulate tax deferred and are taxable as ordinary income during distributions .
Section 457 plans are nonqualified deferred compensation plans available only to state and local government employers , and nongovernment organizations exempt from tax under IRC Section 501 . Generally 457 plans are utilized for two reasons - 1 . As deferred compensation plans that allow participants to reduce their taxable salary in a manner similar to that of 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans . 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plans generally are not available to state and local government organizations . 2 . As supplemental benefit plans that provide executives with supplemental retirement income .
The simple answer to your question is that insurance premiums ARE NOT a deductible expense for anyone . However , depending upon the use of the insurance , for instance , as part of an Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan -LRB- SERP plans -RRB- , there are tax benefits -LRB- deduction -RRB- to the employer realized when the policy 's cash value is paid out to the employee . Additionally , administrative costs may be tax-deductible as a business expense . Separately , under anexecutive bonus plans where the bonus is paid directly in the form of premium payments to the insurer for policies owned and FBO of the executive , the employer has no ERISA reporting , potentially tax deductible costs and can avert tax rules applicable to Qualified Pans and employer owner line insurance . Please feel free to contact me through my profile if you have additional questions .
This appears to be a simple question ; however , publicly traded corporations have found that by purchasing key person policies on senior executives they can provide lavish payouts when that executive leaves the firm . The idea is simple ; the corporation has an insurable interest in the life of the executive . There are costs of securing a replacement and it the loss of a key employee can affect the companys ability to borrow money . All these factors and many others make these senior executives very valuable . The corporation can insure them to make up the financial impact that their unexpected death would make . By using cash value life insurance they can also accumulate a large amount of cash which will ease the transition when the executive leaves .
Supplemental executive retirement plans normally take the form of non-qualified deferred compensation arrangements . The so-called `` golden handcuffs '' mean the promise to pay comes with a substantial risk of forfeiture . Non-qualified retirement plans do not meet the same criteria as qualified plans . These non-qualified plans may include payouts in company stock or benefits funded by life insurance .
First of all , put money in tax advantage accounts . Deposit funds into Roth-IRAs , municipal bonds , life insurance policies and 529 college savings plans if you have kids . When clients open these accounts , they normally do not have to pay taxes when the money is withdrawn . Why ? The client is contributing to these accounts with after-tax dollars . Next , protect yourself by obtaining disability insurance , long term care coverage , health insurance and buy life insurance . Clients need life insurance so that loved ones can pay the bills and have funds to provide for the family . The long term coverage will help just in case a client needs care in a nursing home . Reduce your liabilities as soon as possible . Get out of debt and stay out of debt . Set aside at least three to six months of your monthly salary . There might be a change in employment , there might be an accident , or repairs to the home or car . Here is a brief overview that will help clients plan for retirement . Start early . For example , if you save $ 10 a day for 30 years and invest the money at 8 % per year , you would have almost $ 450,000 for retirement . Moreover , if clients saved $ 20 a day for 30 years at the same rate , he or she would have almost $ 900,000 for retirement . This is why the concept of using tax advantage accounts is so important . Here is a good rule of thumb when planning for retirement . According to the Financial Analysts Journal , `` Americans need to save 22 times their income '' to retire comfortably . What does this mean ? Clients that make $ 40,000 a year , need $ 880,000 when they retire -LRB- i.e. $ 40,000 x 22 -RRB- . Keep in mind that this is only a tool to use that will help you with your retirement planning . Finally , clients need to take into consideration their home mortgage balance -LRB- s -RRB- , the kids college education costs and life insurance needs . I will be glad to help you meet your retirement planning goals . I listen to all my clients first . Then , we develop a plan and then we execute that plan . I can be reached at 912-631-3186 .
A supplementae executive retirement plan or SERP is a form of non-qualified deferred compensation . Since the planned is non-qualified , the employer has the ability to select who participate in the plan -LRB- i.e. they can choose to offer such a plan only to a select number of employees and do not have to make the offer to everyone -RRB- . Traditionally the plans are set up as additional retirement benefits to an employee who is highly coveted by the employer . The plans are used as an incentive to keep certain key employees and disuade them from leaving the employer . The retirement benefits offered under the plan are only payable to the employee if he or she stays at the employer for a certain period of time , which can be a rather longer period of time .
Term life insurance is very popular to cover indemnification planning scenarios . Its cheap and does the job . Permanent life insurance for those in high tax brackets is very popular as supplemental retirement income and executive compensation plans . Permanent life insurance also works well for estate planning , charitable giving and making a difference in succeeding family generations .
In scenarios where executive benefits are a recruiting and retention feature of the company , disability insurance can be a significant key person employee perk . The disability insurance premium can be expensed as a legitimate tax deduction to the company . But if benefits are generated to the executive , the income is taxed as oridanry income at the executive 's effective tax bracket .
The simple answer is `` Yes ! '' Corporate Owned Life Insurance -LRB- COLI -RRB- is ethical . However , in recent years , because of some of the abuses , it has become more scrutinized in its uses . There are many valid reasons for using COLI . It could be very important to a company if a key person in their company died . In some cases , it would take months or years to replace that person with a specific skill set ; so COLI maybe purchased to offset the loss . It may also be used as `` golden handcuffs '' , where the life insurance builds cash value for a future date to pay executive retirement beyond a 401k . This can be done formally , through legal documents -LRB- the IRS even identifies it by code number much like `` 401k '' -RRB- . The unethical part came into play when companies purchased life insurance of people where they had no insurable interest -LRB- in other words would not be at risk of significant loss by the death of the person insured under the policy -RRB- . For example , CompanyZ purchased COLI on all of its 22,000 employees - from executives done to the maintenance.When a rank-in-file employee died , Company Z kept the death benefit , giving them a tax free benefit . The courts decided that Company Z did not have an insurable interest and required them to pay the family the death benefit . The policy was clearly determined not to be COLI but to be STOLI -LRB- Stranger Owned Life Insurance -RRB- .
The first place to look is your husbands employer group plan to see if he elected life insurance . It may also be itemized on his pay stub or payroll check receipt . It is possible that his employer purchased life insurance on him as a key executive or part of his executive package separate from the businesses group plan . The next place to look is your checking account for payments that appear to be to an insurance company .
There is a calculator available on the internet called the Living to 100 calculator . Medical science is steadily increasing the life expectancy of the general population . If the calculator shows that you can expect to live past normal life expectancy , an annuity is going to make awfully good sense . An annuity is a contract with a life insurance company to exchange a sum of money for a lifetime of monthly payments . There are variations to meet your specific situation . If you are in pre-retirement an annuity can be used in most tax qualified plans . In these plans your risk tolerance should guide you to a specific plan that allows you to leave all the investment decisions to professionals or handle them yourself . The key is that the deposits in the annuity are a transfer of capital from current consumption to future consumption . The results of the annuity while important are not nearly as important as the decision to move assets from the present to the future . An annuity does this quite well . An annuity can also be purchased outside a qualified retirement plan . While losing some of the tax advantages of the qualified plan , the annuity still accumulates money free of current income tax and allows the owner a great deal of flexibility in drawing the annuity down . An annuity addresses the issue of excess withdrawal risk by making regular payments without the ability to raid the bank . Since excess withdrawals have ruined many retirement programs this is a very important issue . The monthly check is like a paycheck and the retiree learns to live within their means . An annuity addresses the frailty risk in that it is already established before the retiree becomes frail . It is very simple to negotiate and the retiree will not require any professional assistance to use the annuity . In the same vein it addresses the issue of Financial Elder Abuse because in most cases no one can access the funds , not even the annuitant . Other than a variable annuity , most annuities are not subject to market risk . Once the annuity starts to make monthly payments , they will continue for life regardless of the performance of the market . Annuities are also not involved with Interest Rate Risk Annuities can be established in such a way to efficiently handle the unexpected loss of a spouse . The annuity can be set up to pay the same or a reduced benefit for the lifetime of the surviving spouse . An annuity can be an efficient way to reduce stress in retirement . The results are predictable ; it doesnt require anything from the annuitant and will be there as long as the annuitant survives . An annuity is a contract that is executed outside the estate and can pass directly to the beneficiary without the time consuming probate procedures . This can provide cash for paying estate taxes or final expenses . An annuity is a very important part of the retirement income plan . It has its own tax regulations and may be instrumental in keeping taxes at a manageable level . The key is that it is a financial product that blended with others gives the diversification a retiree needs to handle the changes that they might experience .
I tend to agree with Larry . Life Insurance primary intention is to provide a tax-free death benefit to beneficiaries upon death of the insured . You need to understand this part of Life Insurance before looking at all the benefits provided . Life Insurance can provide supplemental income to meet any need if funded correctly . Life Insurance is one of the only vehicles that can provide tax-free income , a tax-free death benefit ! Life Insurance is used by businesses for buy-sell situations , key employee needs , executive retirement plans , etc. . When the Life Insurance is funded correctly , which by the way , it is my experience that most agents do not do , it will become a true asset designed to meet your future needs .
Contact ING and request documents to execute to withdraw money from a retirement plan . It depends if it is an IRA or 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and if you are over 591/2 or not . If you want to withdraw funds from a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan you can only withdraw money that you put it or is vested in a company plan . If you take the money out before you reach retirement age you will pay a penalty of , I believe , 10 % and have to pay taxes on the income . You may be better served to take a loan out if it is permitted .
In most cases the disability premium is not being deducted as a business expense , so the benefits that are generated by the policy to the claimant are tax free . However , in some business scenarios , disability insurance is expensed as an executive benefit . Then policy benefits are taxed as ordinary income at the effective tax bracket rate -LRB- in this case -RRB- of the executive .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How To Evaluate Disability Insurance ?
To evaluate Disability Insurance , you want to be sure to compare similar plans so that you are comparing `` apples to apples '' price-wise . You most likely want to include `` own occupation '' so that you can be paid if you can not perform your own job , not just any job . You will want a `` residual '' benefit in case you can work some , but not as many hours as before , or not produce as much as before in the hours that you work , or not make as much for what you do accomplish , due to your disability . You want to make sure it lasts as long as you would want , and that you most likely will have enough resources on hand to get you through whatever elimination period you select .
How to evaluate a long term disability plan ? It all comes down to the definition of what disability is . The best policies use the fewest words to define what disability is . The more words beyond that one sentence are really exceptions to the first sentence . The definition should be short and to the point . That is where you start and actually finish your evaluation . Why ? because the rest of the information does n't matter if you do n't qualify or if your qualification ends after a couple years .
In evaluating Term Life Insurance , make sure that the policy is guaranteed , not just assumed to be guaranteed . By this I mean , check to see if the premium is guaranteed to not go up for the entire term , and that the face amount will not go down for the entire term . Evaluate the life insurance company , to make sure it is rated at least A by AM Best . Finally , evaluate the agency you purchase the policy through , to see if they are trustworthy , have a lot of complaints , and will be available to help you with questions or service requests down the road . Clues as to reputability for online agencies are how long they have been in business , whether they introduce staff members on their web page , if they are part of the Better Business Bureau , etc. . If you cover those three bases , you should make a good choice in term life insurance .
How does Disability Insurance protect you ? By protecting your INCOME . Unless we are fortunate enough to have a partner who makes enough to support our lifestyles , most of us would undergo substantial hardship by losing our source of income due to a disability . Even short term disabilities can quickly deplete the reserves some of us have stashed away for emergencies . Long Term or permanent disabilities can be devastating to even high income earners . Having Disability Insurance does not provide you with 100 % of your original salary , but can replace approx 70 % of it so that you at least have some time to regroup and evaluate your employment and lifestyle situation . It may be possible to live on 70 % of your income , even indefinitely . It is not possible to live with no income at all . That is the protection Disability Insurance provides .
Over the years car insurance providers as well as providers of other insurance solutions , have evolved their underwriting review practices in order to better evaluate the risk they are being asked to insure . Many years ago things like the color of a car or whether it had 2 or 4 doors would affect the premiums paid . These days , hoewever , insurance companies are much more sophisticated intheir evaluation rocedures and many have included credit history when evaluating an applicants ; request . Simnilar to one 's driving record and accident history , a credit report can help an insurance companyu to better understand the risk factors of one 's life style . Thus , a better credit history , along with a clean drigving record , hepls an insurer to feel more confident that they are insuring a person less inclined toward risky decisions .
Disability Income Insurance evaluates health factors , so the cost of the policy will depend on how the applicant is rated health wise . If a nonsmoker who is of normal weight and has no health history , Preferred ratings can be given . The price also depends on the risk of the occupation , how much income the applicant makes -LRB- and how much of that income they want to replace in case of disability -RRB- , and what bells and whistles they want on their policy . For a 40 year old male office worker who makes $ 60,000 per year , the price can be as good as $ 50 per month for a plan that will last to age 65 .
When evaluating long term care insurance , you will be given a spreadsheet of 2 or more companies ' products to compare . This makes it pretty easy to compare similar features of each policy . You will want to evaluate the companies : their rating , their rate hike history , whether they have a disproportionate number of claims against them . You can check the cost of care in places that provide long term care in your area , to make sure you are not buying too much or too little coverage . And here is a helpful evaluation sheet to examine different features of your policy : WEBSITELINK
To sell your insurance policy , you would contact a company that specializes in `` life settlements '' . They will first evaluate your policy to see if there is any value in it to a potential purchaser . This evaluation also includes an evaluation of you , because they are counting on you passing away within a few years in order to make a profit . If yours is a policy in which they are interested , you will fill out an application and they will see if there is a settlement that everyone can agree on .
You need disability insurance as `` paycheck protection '' . You should look at your current monthly budget and determine what needs to be covered if you were to lose your paycheck due to an accident or illness . 1 in 4 20 year olds will go on disability before they retire from work . You should look at the your expenses and determine what is the net amount of income that I could get by on . Many people have disability insurance through their employeer . You have to be careful because this policy is usually paid `` pretex '' and is taxed upon your drawing income . You need to check your employeers policy to determine what your benefits are for disability . Business Owners can get a disability policy to pay for their business income . What would happen to your business if you could not do what you do daily to generate income . Would you need to hire somebody ? You can get a policy to cover this . Would your business stop working and revenue dries up ? You may be able to cover this . You need to work with an independent agent to compare the rates and benefits of multiple companies as they treat each situation different . An example would be a Physician who might be offered more income during their disability with a particular company . You would need to check to see if you receive benefits if you can not work your current profession versus working at anything . All paychecks need protection . You should have your evaluated and deceide how you would do if you became disabled .
You would need to start by contacting a life insurance agent who can assist you in being evaluated for a life settlement . I say contact an insurance agent because he/she may have other options to help you reach your goals or free up some extra cash -LRB- e.g. reducing the face amount -RRB- . If a life settlement does appear to be the best choice , you will be evaluated for life expectancy , and your policy will be evaluated for features that make it desirable to viatical investors . Life settlements work the opposite of life insurance : the shorter it appears you have left to live , the more money your policy is potentially worth to investors . Term policy has no cash value , so investors will only be interested in a policy that has more years left than you are expected to live , and/or is able to be converted to a permanent policy .
The key to comparing Medicare Part D plans is evaluating the drug formulary . It does n't matter if you have a Medicare Advantage plan that includes drugs or you are evaluating a separate Part D plan , you must compare the drugs on the formulary . Medicare.gov has a drug formulary finder which is beneficial .
A Life Insurance Blood Test evaluates the risk you pose to the life insurance company based on your mortality , which is measured in part with a blood analysis.Here are the chemistry items being evaluated . Glucose , Fructosamine Glycated Albumin -LRB- AGP -RRB- , Blood Urea Nitrogen -LRB- BUN -RRB- , Alkaline Phosphatase , Total Bilirubin , SGOT -LRB- AST -RRB- , SGPT -LRB- ALT -RRB- , Gamma Glutamyl transferase -LRB- GGT -RRB- Total Protein -LRB- Albumin and Globulin . -RRB-
Most insurance companies require the homeowner to carry insurance that covers the cost of reconstructing the home . This can be a great deal different than the current market or assessed value of the home . Companies rely on independent evaluation programs and adjust the amount of coverage annually to reflect the increased cost of reconstruction . Get another evaluation done to see if that is the source of your problem .
Annuities are rated by independent financial rating companies . These companies specialize in evaluating and assigning a rating to different types of Financial Companies & Issuers . The main companies that do this are Standard & Poors -LRB- S&P -RRB- , Moodys , Fitch , A.M. Best , Weiss , & Comdex . It is important to know that each company has it 's own rating scale . And rating scales can also differ depending on which type of financial company is being evaluated . S&P has the easiest to understand rating scale ; AAA , AA + , AA , AA - , A + , A , A - , BBB , BB + , BB , BB - , B + , B , B - then the same for C then D and then F is default .
Although credit is amopng the underwriting tools that a company uses to evaluate a homeowners risk , there are others . Prior loss history , proximity to fire services , certain breeds of pets , amount of dwelling coverage required and alarm systems may also come into play in that evaluation . I have not seen a case where credit alone was a reason for acompany to deny coverage . I have seen many cases where one 's credit score did have an impact on the amount of premium charged , however .
There are thousands of accidents each day across the nation . These accidents are analyzed in great deal to identify the causes and conditions that lead to accidents . The data is evaluated in close detail and in some states the insurance companies can charge by age and sex . Going to that pile of data , they can determine exactly what it costs to insure a large group of 19 year olds with two years of driving experience . In other states , California being one , you are only allowed to evaluate on driving experience , not age . The important thing is that the rate is based on actuarial data . It isnt that someone has an axe to grind against young drivers . Young drivers simply cost the company more to insure .
The question , `` How do I determine how much life insurance do I need '' is one that should be asked by everyone and re-evaluated every year or so . Why ? Because things and circumstances change . There are a number of formulas that are popular with insurance sellers , so the answer you get will depend on who you ask . I would ask you , `` how much do you need for WHAT ? '' In other words : what is your goal for your insurance ? If you have over $ 5.2 million in assets you may want your life insurance to protect your heirs from the tax liability of your estate . If not and your mortgage and credit is all paid off , you may just want your beneficiary to be able to maintain the life style you 've provided for them for the rest of their life . If you still have a mortgage and credit bill you may want to make sure those are all paid in the event of your demise . Or your `` what '' may be a combination of things . That is why you need to work with an agent who will truly look out for your best interests and ask you the right questions .
A life insurance underwriter is someone who evaluates the risk of issuing a policy based on many factors , of which the main one is life expectancy . The person making this evaluation used to write their name under the definition of the risk , thus came the title , `` underwriter '' . It is a very difficult job as life insurance carriers have many regulations to follow , they must charge wisely so their company stays solvent , and they must know a realm of health information in addition to being astute financially . Therefore , there are often underwriting teams , including medical doctors , when a life insurance company covers a broad range of risk . Not only do underwriters look at medical risk , but since 9-11 they also must be sure that the face amount applied for fits the financial means of the applicant , because life insurance can be used by terrorists for money laundering . They look at pharmacy records , driving records , and MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- . Some policies do not require any exam or medical records , some skip the exam but still have the option to order medical records , some just order exam and rarely order medical records , and some routinely order both . All these steps together ensure that the proper rating is given and that the life insurance company will be able to pay all out all its claims .
When you are evaluating an investment advisor or a financial planner , often it comes down to relationships . There are , however , a number items you should check including : - References from clients - Qualifications - Investment philosophy - How they are compensated ? - How are they regulated ? More information is available on choosing your financial planner at WEBSITELINK Remember it is your money . If you have further questions , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The cheapest auto policy is the one that completely pays a claim . That company will make you whole when you have a loss . No matter how much or how little you pay , that company is the cheapest , and it just happens to be the best because it pays your claim . We want to evaluate insurance by its price but the real test is the way it pays your specific claim .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Why Do Health Insurance Rates Increase ?
Health insurance rates increase because the underlying cost of health care services increases every year and our population 's average consumption of health care services has been increasing for many years . If the cost of gasoline steadily rises and at the same time you are driving more miles each year then you understand it costs you more to operate your car . Health care services are the gasoline and using more health care per person is the increased miles driven part of the analogy above . That addresses the basic economic factors that have been happening for decades . Now add to those the impacts of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and you have a whole new set of cost drivers being added to the equation . For example , ObamaCare does add taxes and fees to insurance plan costs and medical devices - these costs are passed on to the consumer . The law mandates that a wide range of preventive health care services must be covered at 100 % , all policies must cover maternity -LRB- many individual policies did n't -RRB- , no medical underwriting is allowed , polices must be guaranteed to be issued and pre-existing conditions must be covered immediately , and these are just some highpoints of the coverage changes now required . While all of these requirements may sound good , and they do benefit many people , there is no way around the fact that such changes will increase health care consumption even further . More demand for a finite resource equals higher costs . An aging American population is also a driver of increased health care consumption and , with the Baby Boom generation entering their retirement years , will be for years to come . This gives you a generaloutline of why your health insurance rates have been increasing and will continue to be increasing for the foreseeable future . As I described above , our nation has many structural issues that drive health insurance rates higher . Despite its name , the Affordable Care Act serves mainly to expand access to health insurance and health care but does very little to address any of the underlying factors that lead to higher health insurance rates .
Health insurance rates increase because the underlying cost of health care services increases every year and our population 's average consumption of health care services has been increasing for many years . If the cost of gasoline steadily rises and at the same time you are driving more miles each year then you understand it costs you more to operate your car . Health care services are the gasoline and using more health care per person is the increased miles driven part of the analogy above . That addresses the basic economic factors that have been happening for decades . Now add to those the impacts of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and you have a whole new set of cost drivers being added to the equation . For example , ObamaCare does add taxes and fees to insurance plan costs and medical devices - these costs are passed on to the consumer . The law mandates that a wide range of preventive health care services must be covered at 100 % , all policies must cover maternity -LRB- many individual policies did n't -RRB- , no medical underwriting is allowed , polices must be guaranteed to be issued and pre-existing conditions must be covered immediately , and these are just some highpoints of the coverage changes now required . While all of these requirements may sound good , and they do benefit many people , there is no way around the fact that such changes will increase health care consumption even further . More demand for a finite resource equals higher costs . An aging American population is also a driver of increased health care consumption and , with the Baby Boom generation entering their retirement years , will be for years to come . This gives you a generaloutline of why your health insurance rates have been increasing and will continue to be increasing for the foreseeable future . As I described above , our nation has many structural issues that drive health insurance rates higher . Despite its name , the Affordable Care Act serves mainly to expand access to health insurance and health care but does very little to address any of the underlying factors that lead to higher health insurance rates .
Great question ! Unfortunately , that is a tough question to answer without a little more information from you . There are many reasons why your rates may increase within the state mandated rate limits . Some things that can raise your rates are a result of how you drive . A claim filed for an ` at fault ' accident can raise your rate , as can a poor driving record , or speeding tickets , in some cases . -LRB- You are a bigger risk for a payout , so you pay more , just as someone who smokes pays more for life insurance - smoking has been proven to increase your health risks , and bad driving habits increase your risk for an accident . -RRB- Some things are not in your control - rates can increase if the vehicle theft rate in your area increases , if the company has had to pay out significant claims , and their profits are down , or you move into a different age category in some cases . Some companies will even look at your creditworthiness as a basis for your rates . The purpose of insurance is n't to provide you with a steady rate as much as it is to help you in the event that you are in a position where the cost to repair or replace a car is more than you can afford . That said , there are some companies that will offer `` first accident forgiveness '' types of policies , and are a bit more lenient in their rate changes . I 'd tell you that if you are unhappy with your current rate to shop around and see if there is a better company or rate that fits your budget . If you have further questions , please contact me , I 'd be happy to help . Sorry for the unpleasant answer , but I appreciate you asking !
Prior to 2014 it was reasonable to anticipate annual increases in group and individual health insurance in the high single digits to low teen 's range . Though , of course , these are just generalized averages and a host of other factors could move rates higher or , in rarer instances , lower . We have already seen the base cost of health insurance increase fairly substantially in 2014 due to the implementation of the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- . The effect was especially pronounced in the individual health insurance market of almost every state due to the mandatory addition of new benefits , the move to the community rating approach , the elimination of underwriting and adjusting rates for risk , and making all policies guaranteed to be issued without pre-existing condition limitations or exclusions . In mid-2014 we are just now beginning to receive health insurance companies filings for their proposed 2015 rates . While the rate filings vary from state to state and from insurance carrier to insurance carrier , individual health insurance rate increases in the teens to 25 % or more are being reported in many areas across the nation . In some limited instances though , you are seeing some filings requesting rate reductions but these are pretty rare . Therefore , most people should be prepared to see their rates for individual health insurance increase meaningfully again in 2015 , though this effect may be hidden to some extent for those persons who qualify for premium tax subsidies through the government health insurance marketplaces . Many small business groups are also seeing substantial rate increases in their renewal actions for the 2014-2015 benefit year . Increases of 20 % to 40 % are not uncommon .
I have an in ground pool in my own back yard and we absolutely love it . It 's great being the house that all my kids ' friends want to go to . But , does it increase my insurance premiums ? Not necessarily , although it probably should . I 'll explain why in just a moment . First , let 's look at what an insurance company wants if you do have a pool . The biggest thing they want is a fenced enclosure around the entire pool . They want to be sure that anyone who enters the pool intended to enter the pool . Also to keep animals and small children from wandering into the pool . It 's usually not a case of a premium increase , it 's a yes or no question . If you do what they want -LRB- fence -RRB- , they 'll usually insure you with no increases . If you do n't do what they want , they 'll just refuse to insure you . Now , why would your premium increase ? Because a pool brings more liability along with it . Bad things can happen even if you take precautions . I would recommend liability limits of at least $ 500,000 and , usually at least a $ 1,000,000 umbrella policy . Doing this may cost you a little more but it 's well worth it . It may be as little as $ 85/year or it may be a little more depending on your home , cars , and family . Be smart , spend small dollars now to avoid big dollars later .
-- > Normal 0 Im sure your insurance company would say yes to that question and I would say most homeowners will find their premium does increase each year . Usually there are two reasons . Insurers increase their rates and insurers tend to increase the amount of insurance on your home by inflationary factors tied to increased construction costs in your area . But that doesnt mean your premium has to increase every year , it means it may be time to take a closer look at your policy and premium . If you want your policy to pay to rebuild your home if it is destroyed and the cost to rebuild your home has increased , increasing the amount of insurance may be appropriate . But increasing the amount of insurance does not necessarily mean your premium must increase . You may be entitled to additional credits for not filing any claims , structural updates or improvements or added security . Maybe your credit score has improved and you are eligible for more favorable rating treatment . You may even want to check with other insurers to see if they offer more favorable terms . But bottom line , there is no reason your homeowners insurance premium should go up each year . You just have to take a look at it , find out why and see what your alternatives are .
There are many reasons why a home insurance policy would increase . Homes are insured for replacement of dwelling or in other words , what does it cost to build . If cost of construction and materials increases then replacement cost will increase which means your dwelling amount , or the amount to insure increases , which of course causes an increase in premium . Other factors could be regional rate adjustment do to losses . Also age of your home could be a factor . Claims you may have made could be a factor . Did you un-package your auto policy from your home could be a factor . There are many factors which should be discussed with your agent to determine premium changes and what if anything can be done to adjust the rate .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
Well I have to admit it sure seems like it sometimes but auto insurance does not increase every year . There are many variable factors that come into play into an auto insurance rate . For example , driving record , types of vehicles , marital status , where you live and more . However for the sake of argument lets assume all factors remain stagnant and the rate still increases . The insurance industry flows through what we call hard and soft markets . A soft market is when insurance carriers are showing a profit , loss ratios are good and investments are performing . A hard market is when profits are down , loss ratios are high and investments are performing under expectation . It is more of a constant guessing game for the insurance carriers to operate a business and keep their heads above water . If losses continue and profits are down an insurance carrier will make a necessary adjustment to remain solvent by increasing rates . Rate changes can be local or regional depending on performance in any given area . If the market turns around and profits increase the carriers will then loosen up into what we call a softer marketopeningthe doors to more potential clients by lowering the rates again . Cycles usually run for several years before they shift one way or the other simply due to the time it takes to gather loss information and process it . I will give you an example of some recent trends . During the dot com era insurance companies were performing very well and rates were down . The market crashed and rates began increasing due to poor market performance and increased losses . Carriers got a handle on the situation and things seemed to be going well for the next couple of years and rates actually dipped a little , but now it seems we are back at an upswing . If someone was paying $ 500.00 for a 6 month policy that dropped to $ 450.00 for a year they were happy . But then a year later went to $ 475.00 from the consumers point of view this is a rate increase forgetting just two years back they may have been paying $ 500.00 . Again sometimes this type of movement is difficult to see since variables come into play such as moving to a new location , adding or changing cars , adding drivers and so on . I hope that helped at least explain alittlebit on how the insurance industry operates .
Home Insurance is a generic term for either Homeowners Insurance -LRB- Owner Occupied -RRB- or Dwelling Fire Insurance -LRB- Tenant Occupied Landlords Policy -RRB- . The primary purpose of a home insurance policy is to pay for the reconstruction of the home in the event of a fire ; in addition to this primary purpose , there are many additional items which are covered against a number of perils listed on the policy form . In order to maintain sufficient coverage to rebuild the home in the event of a total loss , most policies include an inflation guard endorsement ; the main purpose of this endorsement is to increase the coverage slightly each year to keep up with the annual adjustment of building costs inclusive of materials and labor . It is important for a home not to be underinsured ; policies have a built in coinsurance clause which could cause financial hardship to a homeowner in the event there is a large loss and the home is found not to be sufficiently insured ; the coinsurance clause would only provide coverage on a percentage basis equal to the same percentage of insurance purchased against the actual replacement -LRB- reconstruction -RRB- cost of the dwelling . Some companies will allow the inflation guard to be removed by the insured -LRB- by signed request -RRB- ; however , the prior paragraph may explain why this is not the best option for a homeowner . Although the endorsement has no monetary charge -LRB- premium -RRB- , removing it may heavily impact the policy if a loss were to occur in future years . The inflation guard endorsement may increase coverage amounts by 2 - 5 % based on the current year 's costs of construction and an equally small increase in the annual insurance premium ; however , it is commonly to the homeowners ' surprise that insurance premium is adjusted each year by all carriers based on the prior year 's loss experience to the carrier for the aggregate rating zone -LRB- all homes in the area -RRB- . We receive calls each and every year requesting to remove the inflation guard blaming the endorsement for an increase in annual premium ; many times , carriers may have a 5 % increase in a given area and a 2.5 % increase in coverage limits . Insurance carriers are heavily regulated by the Department of Insurance in each State ; they are also carefully audited by rating agencies most commonly by A.M. Best Company who issues Insurance Company Ratings . It is important for insurance companies to offer excellent customer service , excellent and expedient claims service and pay the full replacement value of all claims presented that are covered by the subject policy ; over and above this , the carrier must maintain financial reserves in order to hold their secure position to handle future losses and offer the security that customers expect from an insurance company . If for example , a Homeowners insurance Premium is $ 500 per year , one could imagine that there is n't much profit to be made after the aforementioned responsibilities and performance guarantees . On extraordinary years where insurance companies post great gains , the auditors and Department of Insurance would require a rate reduction since the profit percentages of the carrier are limited and closely regulated by the Government . Although it is n't common , following many years in the property insurance market , we have seen reductions in annual premium following profitable years . The operation of an insurance carrier is n't as simple as issuing a policy and collecting a small premium ; there is so much more to the contract and operation . For those interested , it is worth contacting a Licensed Representative of your present insurance carrier and inquiring to gain a better understanding .
-- > Normal 0 Whether anyone wants to admit it or not , insurance consumers tend to seek ways to reduce their insurance expenses while insurance providers are always looking for ways to increase their revenue . A rate increase is one alternative insurers might use to increase your premium but more often than not your premium frequently increases for other reasons . An insurer 's base rates are only one factor that goes into the calculation of your actual insurance premium . You should know what those factors are . The most common factor may be an increase in your amount of insurance . Your insurance company may claim construction costs in your area have increased and your amounts of insurance have been increased accordingly . That may be true but higher limits do n't always mean higher premiums . Discounts they may have applied in prior years may have changed or been discontinued . Penalties may have been applied if you had a claim or your credit score has changed . Rate categories may change as your home gets older . The reasons can be endless . But that doesnt mean you have to simply accept the increase . Question the reason for any increase . Determine if you are eligible for other discounts or credits . Consider other insurers who might offer you more favorable premium treatment . In my experience , insurers rates dont change all that often , and they can go up or down . Other factors used to calculate your final premium are usually the reason you see your premiums go up so often . Be proactive , a little effort and a few questions could save you a lot of money .
Talk to your Insurance Professional about your Home Insurance policy and what specifically may cause the premium to increase in your case . In general , there are a number of factors that can contribute to a premium increase . For example , it is likely that your policy has an `` inflation guard '' provision that increases the dwelling amount provided each year . If the dwelling amount on your home increased over last year , that would certainly account for a premium increase . If you suffered a covered loss and had to file a claim , that might affect your renewal premium . If your area was hit with heavy weather related losses , like the ice daming that the North East and specificlally CT was plagued by , even if yo were not affected , your company might have had to take a rate adjustment as a result of the losses . Your Insurance professional wil be able to review your coverage and advise you not only as to why the policy may have increased , but also ways to save .
That is a difficult question to answer since there are many factors as to why auto insurance rates increase . INsurance carriers base their rates on numerous factors such as number of persons on the policy , the age of the drivers , where they live , the types of vehiclesand their driving history . If a policyholder or a listed driver on the policy has had an at-fault accident you can expect that your insurance rates will increase . If you buy a new vehicle that will also increase your premium as well . In California , the accident will stay on your driving record for three years .
Great question ! In addition to the things that Mr. Pipes mentioned , there are a couple of other reasons why your insurance is high . Have you recently moved ? Or had a problem with your credit ? If you 've had a serious ding on your credit before the last rate hike , that may be a reason why . Your insurance company factors in your credit score in their rates . If you recently moved , that may play a role also - from a quiet residential neighborhood to a downtown apartment can hike your rates , or if you 've moved to a higher crime rate area . Unless it 's just to recoup profits on their part , generally rate hikes are a sign of perceived increased risk . I 'd advise you to look for an independent agent who can help you compare prices . Good luck , and if you need help , please contact me . Thanks for asking !
In simple terms , a COBRA health insurance is a short-term continuation of the exact same group health plan you had with your employer prior to termination from that job . So , if you liked the coverage provided by the plan prior to termination , you will still like the coverage provided by the plan under COBRA administration because it is the same plan . What you may not like is the cost under COBRA administration . Many people incorrectly assume that COBRA rates are excessively higher than the rates you paid while employed . This is incorrect . By law , your insurance rates under COBRA can not exceed 102 % of the rate you were paying before termination . So , why does the COBRA premium seem so much higher than the premium prior to termination ? The answer is your employer 's contribution to your health insurance . While you were employed , your employer was definitely paying a portion of yours , the employee 's , health insurance premium . If you worked for a `` benefits rich '' employer , they may have been paying all your premium and even contributing some to your dependents ' coverage . Under COBRA , the employer no longer is responsible to contribute anything to your health insurance premium . You are therefore responsible for 100 % of your portion of the premium as well as that of your dependents . That is why the COBRA cost is more than you were seeing while employed . So , the real question then becomes is it cheaper for me to continue with my current group health plan under COBRA , or is there a better alternative in the personal health insurance marketplace . The only way to answer that question is to solicit quotes from personal health insurers .
Homeowner insurance premiums do not necessarily increase every year but they often do , for some of the following reasons . Check to see if your homeowner insurance carrier was granted a rate increase in your State . That would certainly be a reason . Absent a rate increase or increased hazards with regard to your property -LRB- new swimming pool , dangerous pets , etc. -RRB- , it is possible that your homeowner insurance carrier utilizes an automatic inflation guard feature , to account for increased construction costs in your area , including labor , materials , adherence to local building regulations , etc. . Check with your agent to review your policy . You may want to increase your deductible . You may also want to have the agent obtain rates for you from other carriers in your area . Try to get the strongest rated carriers , if pricing is competitive and coverages are what you want .
As Frank indicated , homeowner insurance premiums should not necessarily increase each year . To make sure your coverage stays current , you should look at the replacement cost necessary to rebuild the home on a regular basis . This number may well increase for a number of reasons , which can increase your insurance premium . At the same time , you can often offset potential premium increases by making your property profile more attractive to insurance companies , such as security and other system upgrades . If your premiums are increasing , then your agent or broker should explain why . Otherwise , this could be a sign that you need to consider other insurance partners who will take a more active role in making sure you have the best policy and premium for your situation .
There are several different reasons home insurance rates increase . Most carriers would probably tell you that at least a portion of their increases are linked to weather/natural disaster related claims increases over the past few years . I often hear from clients in Wisconsin -LRB- our location -RRB- thinking they should not have to pay more for insurance due to the carrier having more lossesfrom fires out west , or hurricanes on the coast.Clients say they did not have a claim so why should they pay more?This debate will rage on but I doubt much will change . Insurance carriers are a business and when they pay out more in claims , due to bad weather or what have you , they have to make up for the difference ; increasing premiums . They spread risk around to remain competetive , trying to balance out higher risk states/locationswith lower risk states/locations . Average premiums on a state to state level often reflect this -LRB- for example , Florida is often ranked number one for premium cost primarily due to the high risk of weather related claims -RRB- . Another common reason carriers provide for increasing prmeiumsis to keep pace with inflation , many policies offer inflation guard to keep pace with estimated values . What is the take away here ? Home insurance is WORTH IT ! Protect your home and investment , likely your most expensive one ! Talk to an independent agent today !
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Health Insurance Cover The Lap Band Surgery ?
Some health insurance plans will cover a percentage of the cost of bariatric surgeries -LRB- including lap bands -RRB- - you would be responsible for the difference . Please note , plans that provide coverage for it may have certain requirements be met for the plan to pay a benefit so you may want to verify with the carrier what/if they will pay for a portion of the surgery . If you 're unsure whether your health plan provides coverage for the procedure , you can check the language inside of your policy , or contact your agent/the carrier to find out . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare will pay for lap band surgery if the patient 's BMI is over 35 , if the surgery has been deemed medically necessary due to other failed treatment , if there has been a psychological evaluation indicating that lap band surgery could be successful , and if the obesity has existed for some time . One of the keys as to whether Medicare will pay for lap band surgery is if there exists a health condition related to the patient 's obesity . If the obese individual is not suffering from sleep apnea , type 2 diabetes , hypertension , or other weight related conditions , Medicare will not pay for lap band surgery .
For certain qualified Medicare and Medicaid patients , the cost of lap band surgery is a covered expense . You do not have to be age 65 or older to qualify for Medicare and Medicare covered lap band surgery . Morbid obesity is considered a Social Security disabling condition that can also qualify you for Medicare and approved lap band surgery .
Some group health insurance plans will cover bariatric surgery including bypass and lap band . In a few states individual major medical plans are required by law to cover gastric bypass surgery . If you are morbidly obese and looking for a plan that specifically covers the surgery you may be denied coverage .
Bariatric surgery -LRB- lap band , gastric bypass -RRB- can be a covered expense under Medicare in some situations . If your doctor certifies that you are morbidly obese and other forms of weight loss have not been successful , you may be considered a surgical candidate if you are healthy enough to survive the surgery .
Some health insurance plans will cover a percentage of the cost of bariatric surgeries -LRB- including lap bands -RRB- - you would be responsible for the difference . Please note , plans that provide coverage for it may have certain requirements be met for the plan to pay a benefit so you may want to verify with the carrier what/if they will pay for a portion of the surgery . If you 're unsure whether your health plan provides coverage for the procedure , you can check the language inside of your policy , or contact your agent/the carrier to find out . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Some Medicare patients will qualify for gastric bypass or lap band surgery . Your doctor must have certified that you are morbidly obese , other methods of weight loss have been tried and failed . Surgery should be considered based on your overall health . Morbid obesity is considered a disabling condition under Social Security , so some on SSDI may qualify for Medicare coverage if you are under the age of 65
Medicare will pay for gastric sleeve , gastric bypass , lap band , or duodenal switch for weight loss , under certain conditions . There must be a health problem associated with being obese , such as sleep apnea or type 2 diabetes . The condition of being overweight must have existed for at least 5 years . You must pass a psychological evaluation , have tried at least one other weight loss program that has failed , and other illnesses as the cause of your obesity must be ruled out . You also need a BMI of over 35 to be approved for Medicare gastric sleeve surgery .
In some cases , Aetna health insurance plans will cover lap band surgery and other forms of bariatric intervention . Your doctor must indicate you are morbidly obese , other forms of weight loss have not been successful and you have related health issues such as type II diabetes , high blood pressure and high cholesterol .
Medicare will pay for laparoscopic adjustable gastric band if the following three conditions are met : 1 -RRB- You must have a BMI of 35 or over at the time of surgery ; 2 -RRB- You must have a qualifying health condition associated with your being overweight that losing weight through gastric banding would help ; and 3 -RRB- You must complete a 6 month Physician Supervised Weight Loss Program proximate to the time of the surgery .
Medicare does not cover liposuction as its considered a cosmetic procedure , even if you have an underlying medical condition related to weight . Some bariatric surgeries may be covered depending on medical necessity , such as a gastric bypass or gastric banding . If youre unsure whether your specific circumstances for a procedure would be covered by Medicare , you can contact Medicare directly to find out if the procedure would be covered . When procedures are covered by Medicare , they typically only pay for about 80 % of the covered healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . If you do not have one in place already , I would suggest considering the purchase of one . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
Renters Insurance will cover your personal property up to the limits of your policy . For example if you have $ 50,000 in personal property coverage in the policy and all your clothes and furniture were destroyed in the fire then you would be able to claim that as a loss . Renters Insurance only covers your personal property and does not cover the structure . It will also cover for losses for theft . Lets say you had your lap top from home in your car and someone broke in your car and stole the computer then you could file that as a claim on your renters insurance policy . Some renters insurance also covers for Loss of Use and Personal Property off premises . This may not be available from ever insurance carrier .
If you have coverage with a major company they may cover part of the processes but you can count on having to pay a chunk of the bills yourself . Have you called the company to ask them ? I hope it covers it for you but it is not `` medically necessary '' and having that bouncing baby on your lap may not be the ball of happiness you are dreaming about . Do you know what is costs just raise that bundle of joy ?
You would be surprised how many claims there are for little lap dogs biting people . In Florida , many of the carriers that write homeowner 's and renter 's insurance exclude pets completely - no matter the breed . If you have pets , it 's important to discuss that with your agent so that they can place your coverage with a carrier that offers animal liability , if it is available .
Life insurance is pure mathematics . The standard rate represents a band of acceptable risks . This band is determined by statistics and the rate assigned is a statistical projection of the cost of paying the death benefits to this group of people . When a persons health , occupation , or avocation cause their risk to be different from standard they are offered an altered rate . It could be a preferred rate , or it could be one of several bands of sub-standard rates . They could also be excluded from certain activities or declined .
AARP does not offer any life insurance - they are only a marketing organization . They associate themselves with certain insurers and allow the carriers to attach their name to a product . For example , life insurance is typically done through New York Life while Medicare Supplement insurance is typically done through United Healthcare . One of my family members who is an AARP member gets letters in the mail frequently for life insurance with the AARP name -LRB- insurance through New York Life -RRB- . However , the coverage is age-banded and only carries the policy through age 80 - the coverage then terminates if they live beyond age 80 with no option to extend the program . Age-banded coverage means the rates change every 5 years as you enter into the next age bracket . They may have other life insurance products available with their name on attached , but that 's what constantly comes in the mail . If you 're looking for term life insurance , I would highly highly highly suggest consulting with an independent agent who can compare multiple carriers for you and discuss your medical history to determine the risk classification each carrier may consider you for -LRB- the risk class directly determines the premiums -RRB- . Shopping before applying is vital ! And there 's no cost to using an independent agent vs. going through a carrier directly . I would n't just buy on name as there are numerous carriers that offer term insurance who offer competitive rates . You can end up spending extra money that you do n't need to when you do that -LRB- that 's not to say a big name carrier would n't in fact be the best cost option , you just want to be sure you 're not overpaying -RRB- . The risk class is key to figure out first and then look at the rates for a given coverage amount/term length from there . If you do n't know what risk class you would likely fall under for a carrier , then a quote is nothing more than a guesstimate . Term life insurance is very straightforward . If you die during the life of the policy , the carrier pays out the death benefit proceeds . If you outlive the term premium guarantee period and and do n't want to pay the annual renewable term rates -LRB- which go up each year as you get older -RRB- , then you would likely either replace it with a new term or permanent life insurance policy or not have any coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That is an excellent question ! Group policies are those offered to a segment of the insured pool , like your company , for example . Your policies through work are group term policies , with a term of one year . Each year in the fall , you either renew the policy , or switch to a new one . The cost of the policy is lower generally for your employer if the group of you is generally healthy and claim free , and a larger group . Another type of group policy is like the type that companies like AAA or AARP will offer . They are also spread across a large pool , but theirs are based on your `` age band '' , and increase in cost each time you progress into the next `` age band '' -LRB- typically every 5th year -RRB- . In their case , the term period lasts until you turn 80 , when they will end . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
That is a great question ! `` Guaranteed premium '' means that the price stays the same - it 's `` guaranteed '' . This is typical in most whole life policies , but can be different in term life policies . For example , you might purchase a straightforward 10 year term policy . In 99.9 % of those policies , your premium payment is the same from first payment to the last payment . In a term policy like those offered by AAA or AARP , however , their premiums will increase as you age , and pass through each `` age band '' -LRB- 55-59 , 60-64 ,65 -69,70 -74,75 -79 -RRB- until you reach your 80th birthday , and the policies end . They will `` Guarantee '' your price through each band , but increase it in the next one , and `` guarantee '' that rate until the next . If you have questions , please drop me a line , I 'm always happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Globe Life is an A + rated insurance company by A.M. Best so their financials provide a stable outlook . One of the big attractions that people look at with Globe Life is the $ 1 for $ 50,000 campaign you see on flyers that come in the mail . No exams , limited health questions , and it can be issued in just a few days . It sounds like a great deal , right ? The important thing to look at when buying any coverage is the structure of the policy and the premiums that you 're paying throughout it 's life rather than just what you 're paying for the first month because chances are ... you 're going to live longer than 1 month into the policy . Some policies offer level premium guarantee periods -LRB- e.g. you 're paying the same premium for 10 years , 15 years , 20 years , or 30 years before the premium can go up , or you 're locking it in for life with a GUL or WL policy -RRB- . Other policies feature banded coverage meaning the premium may be cheaper up front than level premium policies , but they go up when you hit the next age bracket in it 's structure -LRB- typically every 5 years -RRB- . A banded policy can sound like a great thing for the first few years , but if you keep it for a long time it will likely become much more expensive and the cumulative premium that you 've paid can/will be a lot higher than what you would have paid under a level premium policy . When it comes to insurance , sometimes taking a more conservative approach to things can be more advantageous for you in the grand scheme of things than the short pluses you may get in the present . Often times people will buy a cheap policy just to have some coverage and the face amount sounds like a lot of money , but the coverage does n't come close to meeting the needs . It 's always recommended to consult with an experienced broker before buying any coverage to make sure that what you 're looking at buying is suitable and will be the best deal for you . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Term insurance keeps the premiums fixed and guaranteed for a specific number of years -LRB- e.g. 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , or 30 years -RRB- or is age-banded - banded life insurance policies increase every 5 years when you hit the next age bracket -LRB- e.g. 50-54 , 55-59 , etc. -RRB- Under traditional policies , after the term period has expired , the premiums change to annual renewable term insurance and increase each year -LRB- based on age -RRB- . You can elect to continue the existing term insurance policy up until age 95 -LRB- with most policies -RRB- , however , the price to keep that policy in force becomes astronomical and you would never pay it past the first couple of years -LRB- if at all -RRB- . Most people replace a term insurance policy with a new term or permanent policy before the term period on their current one expires . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Much Is Renters Insurance Through Geico ?
Geico itself does not generally issue renters insurance but rather brokers it through other insurance carriers . Still the price will depends on the value of the items you wish you cover , the location of the apartment or home rented , your heating source , and other risk assessment variables . Because of the degree of variability it is difficult to give a general answer to cost , but you can easily obtain this answer by contacting Geico 's customer service for a quote .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
Geico does not sell life insurance originated within their own company . If you attempt to get a life insurance quote from Geico 's website it will take you to another agency . Geico says on their website that life insurance policies are written through non affiliated companies and secured through Geico Insurance Agency , Inc. .
Geico does not actually insure Renters or Homeowners . Geico partners with other insurance companies like Travelers and ASI who provide the insurance . Geico claims to cut out the middle man but that 's simply not true . Geico is an independent agency just like every local agency in your community . Geico just spends a tremendous amount of money to convince the public they are the cheapest and the best . It 's simple not true .
Geico themselves does not offer life insurance policies - the coverage programs secured through the Geico agency are written through non-affiliated insurance companies -LRB- e.g. Genworth , Aviva , Transamerica , MetLife , etc. -RRB- . If you try to run a quote on Geico 's website , you are re-directed to another quoting site that Geico does not own . There 's numerous insurance companies out there . I would recommend working with an independent agent so you can see a wider range of options that are available to you . If you have any other questions or would like assistance with your life insurance needs , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
Geico life insurance is written through non-affiliated life insurance companies and is secured through Geico Insurance Agency , Inc. . Therefore , Geico offers life insurance from a number of different life insurance companies at a variety of prices . You can get free life insurance quotes from any number of websites . By choosing one that gives `` instant '' quotes you will get your rates without having to talk to anyone .
Geico only writes personal auto insurance . They do not write homeowners insurance . This can be a competitive disadvantage to Geico because many insurers offer multiple policy discounts . What this means for you , the consumer , is you get a discount on your premiums if you have your auto and home insurance with the same company . To offset this competitive advantage , Geico has arranged partnerships around the country with insurers that specialize in homeowners insurance . This partnership gives Geico the ability to match the multiple policy discounts other insurance companies offer . Their partnerships are with different companies around the country . So to find out which insurer is partnered with Geico , you need to contact Geico dirrectly . Why do insurance companies do this ? For several reasons . It is cheaper for an insurance company to service multiple policies with the same customer than one policy . So they pass on the savings in overhead to the customer . Sometimes the insurance company uses the two policies to subsidize each other . So if you have an accident with your car , the premium the insurer gets from your home insurance can sometimes subsidize the bad loss experience on the auto policy , and vice-versa .
Geico offers Term Life Insurance through non-affiliated insurance companies . In other words , the life insurance is not underwritten by Geico ; Geico just helps you get it by referring you to a brokerage that carries quotes from multiple life insurance companies . The agency they refer you to is not owned by Geico .
Geico does write home insurance as a broker but not as an insurer . This means that you can work with a Geico representative to purchase a home policy and they can even service the policy , but that policy is actually written through another carrier . If you have a home policy through Geico you can find out who the insurer by reviewing the policy declarations page .
Geico is really two entities . One is the insurance company that provides auto and vehicle coverage . The other is the Geico insurance agency . They are simply like any other independent agency in that they represent other companies through which they place insurance . This is what Geico does with life insurance . If you purchase life insurance with them , it will be placed with a different company . That does n't necessarily make it bad . It 's most likely a company that many independents write through . My advice is to find the right agent . One you can trust to do the best thing for you and your family , not just the cheapest option . Then listen to him/her and take their advice . You 'll come out ahead in the long run .
In answer to your question here , unless someone has knowledge to the contrary , Geico backs Geico homeowner policies . Even though Geico is a wholly owned subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway , the Company of which Mr. Warren Buffett is Chairman , the Geico Corporation is licensed to do business in all States and would pay claims under the Geico name .
Geico itself does not generally issue renters insurance but rather brokers it through other insurance carriers . Still the price will depends on the value of the items you wish you cover , the location of the apartment or home rented , your heating source , and other risk assessment variables . Because of the degree of variability it is difficult to give a general answer to cost , but you can easily obtain this answer by contacting Geico 's customer service for a quote .
Geico does not write Homeowners insurance . If you have your Auto insurance with Geico , they will typically offer you a Homeowners quote through Geico General Agency and the insurance company they use is Travelers Ins . Co. . They do this so that you can receive a Multi-policy discount . I hope this answered your question .
Geico does not write Renters in their name they are written throw other companies they send it out to . I remember one company was Assurant . They are a great company i had my Renters with them at one time . You should contact Geico directly where they can fully explain who would be covering you in case of any loss and any other questions you may be have . Good Luck . Thanks .
Geico ` Government Employees Insurance Company ' underwrites Auto Insurance in all States . When it comes to Property Coverage , Geico has a wholly owned subsidiary that is an insurance agency and they act as an agent to provide quotes with selected insurance carriers who underwrite property risk . Renters Insurance is a very valuable form of protection that usually comes at an inexpensive premium . For those that are concerned about a legal action brought against them for negligence which is very common in the situation of tenants , it is imperative that you purchase the maximum allowed amount of liability insurance ; usually $ 500,000 . Depending on the State . An approximate 80 % of the premium will depend on your declared amount of Personal Contents and required deductible -LRB- we recommend no less than $ 1,000 -RRB- . The deductible does not apply to Personal Liability in most States thus allowing you 100 % defense and coverage -LRB- please refer to your policy for specific details -RRB- . For a Renters Insurance quote in California , Arizona or Nevada . You may use the following link : WEBSITELINK We will be happy to answer any further questions ! Happy Researching !
Unfortunately , Geico does not carry Disability Insurance . Geico mainly carries property-casualty insurance , including home , condo , co-op , mobile home , flood , and renter 's insurance ; auto , commercial auto , collector car , motorcycle , ATV , boat , water craft , snowmobile , and umbrella insurance ; overseas and business insurance ; identity theft insurance ; and life insurance from an outside source .
Geico acts as both an insurance company and an insurance agency for other insurance carriers . Although Geico is known for their Direct Auto Insurance Policies , Geico Home Insurance is offered by Stillwater Insurance Group . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Does Geico have life insurance ? Most of you know that Geico is a property casualty insurance company , and of course they have the gecko as their advertising mascot . They outsource all their life insurance applications off their web to an outside vendor , so they do n't really manufacture term life insurance nor do the manufacture permanent life insurance . So when you 're looking for life insurance and you 're one of their actual policy holders in property casualty , a lot of times you 'll stay within that agency and you 'll go ahead and purchase other insurances like life insurance . If you 're looking for life insurance , you may want to also look online at different brokerage houses to see if their price tags are any better than what Geico is offering .
GEICO or Government Employees Insurance Companyper se does not underwrite a life insurance , it is primarily a property and casualty company focused on auto , boats , motorcycles , RVs , etc. . You may find that agents that sell GEICO products offer life insurance but through other life insurance companies or will refer the life insurance business out to other carriers .
Geico Insurance Company is a preferred underwriter for Auto Insurance ; Geico is not a Home Insurance Company ; however , they own an internal agency which acts as a broker for alternate insurance carriers with whom they place home insurance . If one were to purchase auto insurance ` Direct ' with Geico presumably to obtain a lower premium rate with a preferred carrier ; then why would n't the same principal apply to home insurance ? The lowest premium will be afforded to those that purchase home insurance direct from a carrier . It is uncommon to find an auto insurance company and home insurance company anywhere in the country that will offer both the cheapest auto insurance and cheapest home insurance ; thus , the need for package discounts to try and sell the alternate policy . We have devised a link to provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK If there are any unanswered questions , it is important to contact a licensed professional to inquire further .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is It Easy To Sell Life Insurance ?
I would have to say that it is not easy to sell life insurance unless you are gifted in a number of areas . A good life insurance agent must be a good listener as well as an articulate talker ; as good at handling written communication as at handling numbers ; have some medical knowledge in addition to financial knowledge ; be caring but professional . On top of that , you need the funds and training to get your feet on the ground and become successful . For the person who has all that in one package , selling life insurance could be easy . For most people , it is hard work .
Customers can not feel or taste life insurance . Life insurance rarely makes people laugh and fortunately it doesnt make them fat either . Life insurance is not tangible . Death is not a popular subject . Tolstoy wrote a novel about the death of man to illustrate who unaccustomed we are to dealing with that reality . However , on the other hand delivering a death benefit to a grieving family is very rewarding and motivates many of us . Everyone else visiting the grieving family comes with bills or condolences , we come with cash !
Life insurance is not easy to sell as many people have preconceived notions about insurance . Even though life insurance is something that almost everyone needs or wants , people often procrastinate on the life insurance purchase . It can be one of the most important financial decisions a family will make , but often it is put on the back burner . A big reason is that people overestimate the cost by 3 times the price . If people take the time to look into life insurance , they will find that it may be less expensive and an easier process than they think .
Life insurance is not hard to sell . It 's actually very easy to sell . When you 're selling life insurance the main part of your job is prospecting for the right people . You are looking for the people who are aware that they need life insurance . Think of it this way . If you were selling swimming pools it would be very hard to sell them to 90 % of the people . But if you talked only to people who own homes , had yards and been thinking about buying a swimming pool it would be pretty easy to sell them . Selling life insurance is the same way . It 's very easy to sell to the right people and it 's impossible to sell to the wrong people .
What retirement plan is best for small business ? In my opinion I feel SIMPLE plans offer a great value to small business employers who want to set up a qualified plan that is easy to install , easy to account for and simply easy to maintain . What 's that like three `` easys '' and we 're talking qualified plans ? That should sell anybody to at least look at the simple as an option .
I would have to say that it is not easy to sell life insurance unless you are gifted in a number of areas . A good life insurance agent must be a good listener as well as an articulate talker ; as good at handling written communication as at handling numbers ; have some medical knowledge in addition to financial knowledge ; be caring but professional . On top of that , you need the funds and training to get your feet on the ground and become successful . For the person who has all that in one package , selling life insurance could be easy . For most people , it is hard work .
One example of key person life insurance would be to guarantee a quick and easy sale of the business upon the owner 's death . For example If the owner has a wife and children that are not active in the business and would have no idea how to run it , they would probably sell it in a distressed manner if the owner died unexpectedly . If he has a key manager that would be the likely person to sell it to they can purchase a life insurance policy on the owner 's life with the key man as the policy owner . The business can bonus the money to pay the premium to the key man . An attorney will write up a buy-sell agreement and the if the owner dies , his manager has the money and an agreed on price to buy the business from the widow . This makes the transition much easier for the widow PLUS has the benefit of keeping your key employee from straying off and being attracted to greener pastures . When there are multiple business owners , they each need a life policy on each other plus a legal agreement so they can buy out the spouse 's interests if one of them dies . They do n't want a business partner just because she/he happened to be married to their former business partner .
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
Best means different things to different people . To some people best means lowest price . To others it means it accepts their health conditions when other companies might decline you . I 'm going to assume that by best you mean the highest level of coverage regardless of price . That is an easy question to answer . The Plan F Medicare Supplement is the highest level of coverage you can get of all Medicare Supplements . Many companies sell it and they all sell exactly the same thing -LRB- required by law -RRB- but they do not charge the same price . Have your insurance broker show you the rate for all the top companies so you can buy your Plan F cheaper and save . Have him also explain Plans G and plan N which can also be a better value for many people .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
You can make a ton of money selling life insurance . $ 1 million per year . More . A lot more . Of course , a number of factors have to fall into place . Here is my list of those factors that can fuel your propulsion toward making that kind of money : Dedicate yourself to selling life insurance . If you treat it as an ordinary job , then it wont be worth the aggravation . Treat it as the noble profession it is . There is virtue in making sure that the widows and orphans among us are self-sufficient , and dont have to ask for handouts . Commit to being the nicest person you can be . You are , after all , helping people face their own mortality . Be sensitive about that . Take a zen approach to selling : the sale you dont desire is the sale you will get . Should you want the sale ? Sure . Do you need the sale ? Sure . But perspective is essential . In the big scheme of things , this is only a sale . Dont get too attached to it . Become a true expert . Establish yourself as the go-to guy for this product . When somebody has a question about life insurance , your opinion should have the most authority . Specialize . Every other financial professional wants to be a jack of all trades and master of none . But let me ask you this : if you were willing to spend $ 100,000 on your own life insurance policy , would you hire a true specialist or at a mere generalist to get the job done right for you ? To drive home the point : lets suppose you wanted to spend $ 1 million on a new mansion . Would you hire a master builder , or a plumber that had also expanded into construction work ? Integrity , integrity , integrity . Your word should be gold . When you give somebody a quote , they should get approved at that rate . Period . View yourself as an elite producer . Why shouldnt you land a big fish on a regular basis ? If you really have put in the work to make yourself a master of your trade , then those big cases should come to you . Build a great organization . Make sure you can deliver superior service throughout every stage of the life insurance purchasing process . Open your own brokerage , or affiliate with good distributors . Or put together some hybrid of both . Lead a normal life . Too many salesmen divorce their wives and marry their business . Wrong priorities . And take the best care of yourself . Make yourself physically strong and mentally tough , and you will have the endurance needed to succeed . Big time . Ready - set - change . The world is shifting in all different directions . If you chart the right path , you can keep up with it . More than that , you can make it work for you . When I started in this business , I developed a local clientele . I saw every client personally , and was armed with a rate sheet and a few computer printouts . Two appointments , then a sale . All over the kitchen table or business counter . Now I do business across the country , and engage people through email , social media , and cell phones . Lots of ways to connect , to educate , to serve . Its taken some time to get used to the newest ways of doing business . But you know what ? If you let your traditional values guide you in your use of new technology , you will be a winner . Many times over . Just keep finding ways to keep the customer satisfied . Stay connected and build strong relationships . Keep educating , and keep serving . People should be able to find you on their desktop , on their laptop , and in their cell phone . Make it easy for them to tell you whats on their mind . To tell you their problems . So you can solve them . You will get many clients that way , and a lot of them will spend a lot of money on life insurance .
Best means different things to different people . To some people best means lowest price . To others it means it accepts their health conditions when other companies might decline you . I 'm going to assume that by best you mean the highest level of coverage regardless of price . That is an easy question to answer . The Plan F Medicare Supplement is the highest level of coverage you can get of all Medicare Supplements . Many companies sell it and they all sell exactly the same thing -LRB- required by law -RRB- but they do not charge the same price . Plan G is always a better value than Plan F is . You only pay a deductible of $ 146 one per year but you can save $ 200 to $ 300 in annual premium when compared to plan F. Have your insurance broker show you the rate for all the top companies so you can buy your Plan F cheaper and save . Have him also explain Plans G and plan N which can also be a better value for many people .
Life insurance is not easy to sell as many people have preconceived notions about insurance . Even though life insurance is something that almost everyone needs or wants , people often procrastinate on the life insurance purchase . It can be one of the most important financial decisions a family will make , but often it is put on the back burner . A big reason is that people overestimate the cost by 3 times the price . If people take the time to look into life insurance , they will find that it may be less expensive and an easier process than they think .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Can I sell my life insurance policy ? Well , number one , a life insurance policy is personal property . Could you sell it ? I think you can , usually through the life settlement market . But keep in mind that the original reason that you sold the life insurance was not to sell it for that specific purpose and most carriers and life insurance companies are going to take a dim view on you trying to buy insurance for just the purpose of selling it . But if the reason you bought life insurance does n't exist any longer , you could go ahead and sell it on the secondary market of life insurance settlement , and you can sell it for cash . Generally , a cash value contract is going to get a little bit more than what you have in your policy ; sometimes a lot more , depending upon the death benefit and your timeline . Can you sell it ? You could sell it and again , I recommend make sure that you 're doing this for the right reasons . And make sure that your coverage is no longer necessary .
Buying life insurance online is as easy as hitting Google , Bing or Yahoo . There is no shortage of buying life insurance online . My question is why buy online ? You still may not find the best price for the product you are looking for . I highly recommend contacting an experienced independent broker you are comfortable with . The cost for service is free to you the consumer . Life insurance companies do not sell it any cheaper online than they do through a broker . This way you get expert advise for free .
Geico is known for their auto insurance and is a good company . Even though most auto insurance companies will sell you a life insurance policy , it may not be a good strategy to limit your search to them or any one brand . Getting rates for life insurance is easy . You should use a quoter like the one at www.halfquote.com to pull up rates for dozens of companies side by side . Make the companies compete for your business and you will get more coverage for your premium dollar .
Selling life insurance is not easy but it can be incredibly rewarding . It 's a wonderful thing for youto be able to help people to protect their families and also to be able to make a living yourself . This is the ultimate win-win situation . You need to be able to look past the rejections and focus on the positive outcomes .
Finding a life insurance policy begins with finding a life insurance agent . Most life insurance companies require the middle person of an agent in order to purchase their coverage , and even No Exam policies that are offered online or through organizations usually need you to talk to an agent to get them . Finding an agent is as easy as googling `` life insurance quote '' and filling out a form . Or you can call someone local , or call someone on the internet that looks like you can trust them . Once you get that part done , the agent will help you figure out what type of policy to get . Keep your mind open , as what fits your health or budget may not be what you expected , and there are many options that a good agent will know about , to help you get the best possible coverage at the cheapest price . On the other hand , beware of agents who seem to be pushing you to one product for no good reason . Their goal should be to help you get what you need , not sell what they need to make a quota . In the end , life insurance is such a vast industry and there are so many variables that it is very difficult to get the best price entirely on your own . A good website quoter and a good agent can provide invaluable assistance in getting the affordable life insurance that you need .
Yes , short term disability insurance does cover pregnancy . You must apply for the policy before becoming pregnant , or the pregnancy will be considered a pre-existing condition . It is not easy to find short term disability policies , but there are a couple of companies that sell them . Most are provided through work .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Why Would Homeowners Insurance Go Up ?
There are many possible reasons as to why your homeowners insurance premium would rise . Not all of the reasons are under your control . Some of the more obvious reasons for an increase in your homeowners insurance premium are : inflation -LRB- the insurance carrier generally incurs more costs each year -RRB- , claims that you may have filed , a change in your credit rating , an increase in homeowners claims within your carrier or your geographic area , or increases in valuation of properties in your geographic area just to name a few .
Talk to your Insurance Professional about your Home Insurance policy and what specifically may cause the premium to increase in your case . In general , there are a number of factors that can contribute to a premium increase . For example , it is likely that your policy has an `` inflation guard '' provision that increases the dwelling amount provided each year . If the dwelling amount on your home increased over last year , that would certainly account for a premium increase . If you suffered a covered loss and had to file a claim , that might affect your renewal premium . If your area was hit with heavy weather related losses , like the ice daming that the North East and specificlally CT was plagued by , even if yo were not affected , your company might have had to take a rate adjustment as a result of the losses . Your Insurance professional wil be able to review your coverage and advise you not only as to why the policy may have increased , but also ways to save .
Let me put it to you this way , if I may . If you do n't have a mortgage -LRB- which would require you to have and maintain a Homeowners ' policy -RRB- , and you are fortunate enough to have the complete financial where with all to fully rebuild your home if it were totally destroyed , and fully replace all of your belongings at the same time , you do n't need Homeowners Insurance . LIkewise , if you were financially sound enough to settle any law suit that might be launched against you as a result of the serious injury or death of another person or damage to their property caused by you and for which you are then legally liable , you do n't need Homeowners Insurance . Talk to your Insurance Professional . A well thought out and executed Homeowners policy would provide coverage for you for these types of potential losses for literally pennies on the dollar . Why do you need it ? The question is why would you not want it ?
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
That is a great question ! A lot of people have a hard time with the concept of insurance . I 'm young , nothing will happen to me ! Or I 'm a good driver , why do I need insurance ? But inevitably things do happen . You can be the best driver ever , but that does n't mean the teenager texting in the car behind you is ; or that something can go wrong , and you 're laid up in the hospital . Homeowners is the same way . No one thinks that things will go wrong with their house , why would I want it ? Insurance is there to protect you when things do go wrong . You would not think the insurance was a waste of money when you got the check to replace your belongings , or the one that allows you to pay for the hotel rooms that you are forced into when your home is damaged . Insurance is only a waste of money when you drastically undervalue it . Please consider it as protection , and not a waste . Thanks for asking !
If you have the right type of homeowners coverage , this question would be easier to answer . The right type of homeowners coverage would cover your property , both real property -LRB- your home , garage , built in pools , etc. -RRB- and personal property -LRB- clothing , furniture , dishes , yard fixtures , things you could take with you if you moved -RRB- for damage unless there is a specific exclusion or limitation in the policy that says it doesnt . I dont think you will find a specific exclusion or limitation for a pool leak but you will find one that says damage caused by wear and tear or deterioration , or inherent vice would not be covered . So the issue would be , why did the pool leak ? If the liner simply wore out from age or there was a defect , you probably wont be covered . But if neither of these apply ; you may find coverage for the damage . Unfortunately , most people dont have the right homeowners policy . Their policies limit coverage on personal property -LRB- such as above ground pools -RRB- to specific named perils . I call these the wrong kind of homeowners policies . If you have this type of policy , you must show the insurance company the damage was caused by one of the named perils . A pool leak is not a named peril . Under that type of policy , I think you are going to be out of luck .
In virtually all cases if your tree falls either on your car or a neighbors car your homeowners insurance will not pay . You are not responsible for an Act of God and are not negligent . The person in questions auto insurance comprehensive coverage would pay for the auto damage caused by the falling tree . If however it can be proven the tree owner was negligent by not taking care of a tree , and the tree was deemed as hazardous a homeowner could be held liable . -LRB- This generally means a law suit -RRB- . This is not an easy one to prove since there would of had to of been an trail of ongoing complaints both verbal and documented in writing by another party in advance to show the homeowner was negligent in maintaining the tree . Then again if a neighbor was filing complaints over a period of time against the homeowners lack of maintaining the tree that was a potential hazard why did he or she continue to park under the tree ? So at the end of the day it is the duty of all homeowners to maintain their property which includes bushes and trees and show pride of ownership a homeowner is rarely held liable for a branch falling off a tree and hitting a vehicle . The owner of the vehicle must seek coverage under his comprehensive portion of their auto insurance .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
Asking the question why should Renters get Renters insurance is the same as asking why should anyone get insurance ? The purpose of insurance is to pool together monies to reduce individual financial risk from unforeseen losses . Other than car insurance and now health insurance you do n't have to purchase insurance but I certainly would n't recommend it . Even if you are a millionaire you still need insurance . The more money you have the more money you can lose and the cost of insurance is minimal compared to the financial risk you face . Renters needs renters insurance to protect their belongings and also to provide liability protection for negligent acts . Renters insurance typically costs between $ 100 - $ 200 per year and for this cost you get coverage up to $ 25,000 for personal property and up to $ 300,000 in liability . The real question should be why would n't Renters get Renters insurance .
I think there is an image out there of single people as being carefree , unencumbered , no responsibilities . So no need for life insurance . However , I have come across so many single people that are just the opposite , that it makes you think : sure , a whole lot of single people really do need life insurance . Lets suppose you are a single person who is 22 years old . Youve got a girlfriend , or a boyfriend , or both -LRB- yep - sign of the times . -RRB- Just finishing up school , thinking about getting a job . You know at some point youll be married , or at least living with somebody , paying bills , forming some kind a codependent relationship . Maybe you will buy life insurance then . Why wait ? You know that pricing is based on age . Why wait four years when the price will be that much higher ? Buy it now . Lock in at the lowest rate available . Be smart . Now lets suppose youve got a bunch of college debt to carry around with you . Some credit card charges too . God forbid a drunk driver should nail you tomorrow night . Why would you want to saddle your family with these bills ? If your parents have cosigned the loan , or if you have a joint account , they are certainly exposed . Even if they havent , get them out of the line of fire of a greedy creditor . Pick up some cheap life insurance to protect them . Its the least you could do . Another point : do you know how many single men and women out there are successful ? Are making hefty incomes ? Are thriving entrepreneurs ? Tons . Many people postpone marriage and family to get their little empire launched . Along the way , they pick up bank debt . They have businesses to secure . They set up charitable foundations . They set up a whole network of financial interests , and they are at the center of that network . Where they to unfortunately disappear , the entire network would unravel . So they buy life insurance to secure their interests . As would any responsible mover and shaker .
When the premium goes up at the end of a Term life insurance policy is a good time to stop paying the premium . From that point on it will continue to go up in price annually , so unless the Insured person is very ill and does not plan on surviving for many more years , it will become cost prohibitive to keep paying that premium . It would be better to convert the Term policy to a permanent one before the premium goes up , because the conversion is not possible after that . If you are going to pay a higher premium , why not pay it for a permanent policy via a conversion , rather than one that will go up each year .
That is a good question ! I would certainly expect that your company would have reached out to you , especially if you have a good relationship with your agent . I would also expect that it would be a stock answer for someone calling in to your insurance company -LRB- I 'm assuming that you told them who you use -RRB- to tell them to get an estimate , so they would know how to proceed . I would also expect that your company would have asked them who their insurer was/is . Without a police report , collecting anything may be like pulling teeth , as there is no solid legal proof that the damage was caused by your accident . That said , I would n't expect this to just go away , either . I 'd call your agent , and tell them what happened . ask if a claim had been filed against you , and eplain why you did n't report it . If your damage was negligable , or would cost less than your deductible , they will understand why you did not report it . You want some sort of support if the people who are seeking damages start getting persistant about it , and your agent can be infinitely helpful if that becomes the case . I hope it works out well for you , thank you for asking !
You can dispute a homeowner 's adjuster if you believe you have a fair and valid point . Simply ask to speak to his/her supervisor and explain your position and provide proof or documentation why you feel the amount offered in the settlement was not fair . Typically , they will study your information and discuss why or why not they will make a change .
Why is whole life insurance bad ? Because I have something else to sell you or I have n't actually reviewed whole life because I am too lazy to learn about it as a product . Or my favorite , since the IRS created the MEC provision back in the 80 's which created a situation that if you put too much money into a policy , the tax advantages changed . Up until then , your local neighborhood stock broker would sell you life insurance as an investment as it 's qualities were very attractive to investors . Besides common sense tells me that insurance companies price their products based on the risk they bear providing insurance in every and I mean EVERY product they sell . Why would whole life be different ? Why would it be the `` only '' product witha higher price that is `` bad '' for the insured ?
Why is whole life good ? Well there have been several answers that will cover the bases pretty well . A locked in premium , tax deferred growth , a death benefit that grows over time , etc. . Let me give you another reason . a reason that you may not realize until later in life if something happens to you but does n't kill you . That 's right people get sick . Diabetes , high blood pressure , heart problems and so on can and actually do happen to a large segment of our population . The reason I want to point out pertains to the things I just mentioned . Why is whole life good ? Because they ca n't take it away from you . YOU control the policy . The price ca n't go up , the policy ca n't really run out of years and end prematurely . Why is that important ? When I got sick with my type II , hyper tension and recently AFIB , what a reassurance it was to KNOW I was still in control of my policies , that they were n't going to end or explode in price on me . Whole life is expensive because it 's a product the INSURED controls . Cheers .
Having been in a similar situation I would say `` no '' . Why ? Your chiropractor knows there is a limited amount of time to file with an insurance company for payment . Usually about a year . After that , the insurance company is not obligated to pay the claim . Pretty much neither are you . Why ? you did n't hire his/her accounts receivable clerk . Your chiropractor has a professional responsibility to handle the billing end of their practice along with the treatment end . 5 years late is beyond `` reasonable '' to bill . They screwed up and probably with more than just you . This is sort of a fishing trip to see who bites on their office 's lack of follow through . It is basically stating `` I ca n't run my business professionally , please cover for my mistakes . '' I would n't ignore them , I would talk to them about it and state why I did n't feel the need to pay .
To compare life insurance rates , be sure you are comparing the same type of policy to another . E.g. Comparing 10 year term to 20 year term is not a legitimate comparison . Check to see how long the rates are guaranteed not to go up . If one 20 year policy is guaranteed not to go up in price for 20 years , it is not fair to compare it to a 20 year term policy that is guaranteed not to go up in 10 years . Do not compare a policy by the rating they give you . Compare them by price . Ratings are just words . Price is where the rubber meets the road . If you have a quote for a level premium that will not go up in price , and also quotes for graded coverage/policies that can go up in price , it is usually best to go with the level premium that will not go up in price , even if it is higher .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Cover Electrical Surges ?
Yes it does . If you suffer such a loss as a result of a direct or indirect lightening strike , for example , then any damage to your electrical system , well pump , appliances and even in some cases , lost food out of your freezer and refrigerator should be covered . This last one , of course , would be a result of a long term power outage .
Electrical wiring is not covered for wear and tear or deterioration . Electrical wiring would be covered for surging , arching that would of resulted indamageto the dwelling -LRB- structure -RRB- . I recommend you contact your local agent to discuss any specifics of a potential loss due to electrical wiring of the property .
If electrical equipment inside your unit is damaged as a result of a power surge or interruption that originates outside the unit , that damage is specifically excluded . If there is a fire that causes electrical damage , that damage would be covered . If an electrical appliance inside the unit catches fire and damages part of the unit or your personal property , that would probably be covered .
Generally speaking , yes , a standard `` all risk '' Homeowners policy would cover damage resulting from a lightening strike . Certainly damage to your house itself , but also that caused by the sudden electrical surge through either power or cable lines that might damage or destroy appliances or other components would all be covered under your homeowners ' policy . IN addition , if the electrical storm knocks your poer out and you arein teh dark for several days , in many cases your homeowners ' policy would also pay to replace lost food items out of your regrigeratorand freezer .
Damage to your home and personal property that is caused by a sudden and unexpected surge of electrical power that is the result of a lightening strike more than likely would be covered by your Homeowners policy . It is always best to talk to your Insurance Professional about the specific terms , conditions and potential limitations of your particular policy in order to best understand it 's provisions . In addition to damage to your home and/or appliances , be sure to ask about loss of food from your freezer and refrigerator if the power loss is extended . Many Homeowners ' policies include some limited coverage for this , usually about $ 500.00 . Naturally any loss settlement would be subject to your policy deductible .
Lightning is a covered peril of renters insurance so if lightning for example causes a fire that destroys your personal items you would be covered . If you are referring to a electrical surge to something like your TV or computer there would be a limitation of coverage 's depending on the carrier .
Homeowner 's policies vary a lot and the only way to know for sure is to file a claim . Having said that it probably depends on what caused the power surge . If it was caused by something accidental and sudden like a lightning or a short circuit IN YOUR PROPERTY then you are probably covered , if it was caused by something outside of your property such as a problem at the electric station , then you are probably not covered under your homeowner 's .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
This is a difficult question to answer without viewing your specific policy and the coverages contained in it . Is a water heater covered within a policy , generally yes . It just depends on what happens . For example , general wear and tare is not covered under the standard homeowners policy ; however , if you adding coverage for appliances or household items -LRB- that would have cost you more each year -RRB- or you pay for a home warranty , it could be covered for wear and tare . If the damage is from a busted pipe that occurred by no fault of your own or was from a power surge , it could be protected if the policy is setup correctly . It does come down to what exactly you have your policy and within the policy what the limits are . If you have a home warranty program that is always the best way to go because claims with the warranty companies will not result in higher premiums for your homeowners policy , but if you take a claim against your homeowners for the coverage -LRB- EVEN if it is n't covered -RRB- it could result in a slight increase in your prices for next year . If the cost is less than your deductible it would n't benefit you to make a claim on the home policy either .
For the most part a very common cause of power surge is a lightening strike and this is a covered peril in most standard issue Homeowners ' contracts . Sometimes , if power is lost as a result of a storm , when the service is restored there might be a surge and this too would be covered as it is a result of the storm damage .
In Connecticut , most Homeowners Insurance policies do cover damage caused by power surge that is itself caused by a covered peril . One good example is damage caused by a lightening strike . Another example can be experienced in the type of winter we had here or as a result of severe tropical storms suffered by many in the past couple of years . If weather of that kind knocks out power for an extended period of time , once restored , if there is surge damage , check with your Insurance Professional to see about coverage .
Oh , this is a great question ! This is one of those questions that really requires thatyou to look at your policy , and the way that it is worded . Many homeowners are in for a shock when they realize that water from the ground surge is n't covered , unless they have flood insurance , or a rider that includes it . Same with wind damage . Often , deductibles are higher when hurricane damage coverage is included , so that might give you an idea if it is covered in your policy . Get with your agent , and see . Depending upon where you live , and the company that you bought from , you may well be covered , but it never hurts to be certain , especially before you need to know . Thanks for asking !
Some carriers do have this type of coverage . Depending on the damage . The structure usually is covered but your electronics that might of been damaged because the lightning surge fried your tv computers and ect may not be covered . That would fall under equipment breakdown coverage . many carriers offer this and or have it included in the policy . It is very important to read through your policy there are some that have exclusions for this type of coverage . I recommend you talk to your agent or carrier direct to see what is the definitions that are in your policy your agent should of explained your coverage 's . Hope this helps
Your Homeowners Insurance policy provides protection against losses caused by covered perils named in the policy , or those perils that are not specifically excluded -LRB- earth movement and flood for example -RRB- . If your appliance simply gives out over time due to wear and tear , this would not be a covered peril . If however , your appliance is damaged as a result of a fire , or a power surge caused by lightning to name two examples , then they moire than likely would be coverage in your policy for such damage , subject to your policy deductible . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy .
There is a current surge in auto theft in our area . This appears to be drug related . Only insurance policies with comprehensive coverage provide protection against a theft loss . Many drivers opt for the basic form of auto insurance required by law . Their loss by theft would not be covered .
Most homeowners insurance polices will have coverage with a limitation on food spoilage of about $ 200.00 due to a sudden surge or power outage . This amount and how the spoilage is covered can vary so I recommend you read your policy or double check with your insurance provider .
In most cases electricity comes from a source outside of the residence . Fluctuations or loss of electricity from an outside source is probably excluded from your homeowners policy . If the loss of electricity is a result of something that happens to your residence , such as a fire , damages from lost electricity would most likely be covered .
A component of a whole life policy is an accumulation of funds to insure that the policy will pay the face amount throughout the lifetime of the insured and yet the premium will remain level . In the 1960s there was unrest as the stock market surged people thought they could do better managing those funds than the insurance company could , thus the Universal life policy was designed . It gave greater flexibility and a separate fund to develop cash value . None of this was possible before wide spread use of computers . Today there are life insurance policies where the individual can select funding vehicles .
No , homeowners insurance does not cover maintenance . If you have a covered loss the replacement of any damaged electrical components would be included but it will not pay for general electrical work . Covered loss would be things like fire , lightening , wind , hail , weight of ice and snow . Check with your agent if you feel your loss may be covered .
There are some policies and policy endorsements that do provide coverage for a power surge under certain circumstances less your deductible . Please read your policy completely to what coverage is offered and what exclusions there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How Can I Save Money For Retirement ?
That is an excellent question ! There are several really good ways to start your retirement planning , and I will tell you that the sooner you start , the easier it is . If your employer offers a retirement plan where they will match your contribution , or match a percentage , do it ! They are giving you `` free '' money . If they offer an HSA -LRB- Health savings Account -RRB- , contribute to that also.By contributing regularly and often to these accounts , you will have a good start to having an affordable retirement . There are definitely other things that you could do , and it would require far more conversation and space than we have here . If you would like more information , feel free to contact me , ok ? Thanks for asking !
You can not save for retirement without shifting some of your current income into savings . Many equate retirement planning with stock picking . In reality it is all about asset shifting . Participate in your employer sponsored retirement program , if available . If there are any programs that match your contributions save the maximum amount that will be matched . Then start a maximum contribution IRA if you are less than 40 years old . If you are over 50 start a maximum contribution Roth IRA . Denying yourself a little now is much better than having to deny yourself much when you retire .
The best way to start saving for retirement is to keep it simple . Self discipline is key to long term saving . Always strive to pay yourself first . Most people fail by paying bills and spending first , then try to save what is left at the end of the month . Most people have more month than money with this tactic . Take 10 % -20 % of your weekly pay and set it aside for retirement savings . You will be amazed at how fast it will multiple when you start the investing process . Good luck !
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
That is a great question ! One of the biggest issues we face in the financial industry is the cold truth that many people start thinking about their retirement far too late to adequately fund it . There are few conversations that are harder than having to tell someone that their current income will not allow them to save enough to fund the retirement plans they had dreamed of . Starting early really helps make saving enough a real possibility . By not thinking , `` I 'll start next week/month/year '' the process begins , and allows for enough time to make the possibility a reality . Modern wisdom says to live on your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times that much . If you 're barely making ends meet now , you 're probably going to want to save even more . To be on track to make your retirement goals , the rule of thumb in your twenties is save 15 % of your income . Starting your savings in your thirties increases that to about 22 % . Starting in your 40 's ? Think about setting aside about 27 % . 50 's ? Better plan on nearly 40 % . You can see how increasingly difficult it can be to make up the ground as you age . It is so much easier to start young , and take advantage of time to help build your savings . Having time to build your savings becomes easier when things like employer matching on company 401k 's and compound interest are available to take advantage of . Investing enough in your company plan -LRB- assuming your company is good enough to you to still offer one -RRB- to earn their match doubles your savings , and over time , will make a huge difference . Same with compound interest . Opening an account with compounding interest and depositing in it even if it 's small amounts and infrequently will lead to large values in that account when you are ready for retirement . Many people find that saving the money is hard , studies show nearly 60 % of all American 's do n't have enough savings , and over half of Americans entering retirement age are afraid they will not have enough money to retire on . By having a good , working budget , the willingness to cut back on extra 's , and some dedication , you can avoid being one of them . Please feel free to contact me if you 'd like some help with a budget , or ideas on how to get started saving , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
How much you need to save for retirement by the time you are 40 depends of course on your desired retirement lifestyle and the amount needed to fund it . Without those details , I unable to offer you an opinion . There are online calculators available of course . However , here is a retirement worksheet to help you understand the process . I have used 6 % for illustration purposes only , it could be higher or lower and is only to give you a point of reference . Age 65 was used as the retirement age -LRB- 25 years in the future -RRB- , Again . this is for information purposes only . 1 . Annual retirement income which must be provided by savings $ _____ 2 . Amount you must save to generate income $ _____ -LRB- line 1 . X 11.55 -RRB- 3 . Amount you have already saved $ _____ 4 . Amount these savings will have grown $ _____ by the time you retire -LRB- line 3 X 4.2919 -RRB- 5 . Amount of savings still needed $ _____ -LRB- line 4 minus line 2 -RRB- 6 . Amount you need to save each year $ _____ -LRB- line 5 X .01720 -RRB- If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
When you look at retirement planning think of it as 4 phases . 1 . contributions 2 . accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Contribution means how much money will i save each year in my savings vehicle . For example if i have a 401k and i decide i 'm going to contribute $ 5,000 a year that 's my contribution . Accumulation means my $ 5,000 will grow over time in my 401 k savings vehicle.for example $ 5,000 grows in 20 years @ 7 % would add up to $ 219,325 . Distribution is i have saved $ 219,325 in my 401k account , I 'm retired now and i need an income . You decide you want to take out 10 % of 219,325 . Your withdrawal would be $ 21,932 . Now you can have early withdrawals but you have to be aware of which savings vehicle you have because there might be penalties and fees for early withdrawal depending on your age.Some savings vehicles have no penalties . You might want to look at different savings vehicles tha t suite your needs . Transfer is passing your money and assets to your kids , charity , or church when you pass away . Or maybe you have everything put into a trust .
There are two issues involved in determining the likelihood of running out of money . The first is the amount of money you have accumulated to help provide retirement income and the second is the rate at which you spend that money . The return on the accumulation is important however without sufficient capital and a reasonable rate of withdrawal your retirement nest egg can be exhausted at some point . Retirement could last a very long time . Some will be retired longer than the period of time that they work . With improving health and medical treatment for diseases that have shortened the lives of those before us , you could be looking at a retirement of more than thirty years . Retirement may start unexpectedly . Waiting to start accumulating money for retirement can be hazardous . Almost forty percent of retirees report that there retirement started because of circumstances beyond their control . Losing a job after age 50 could trigger retirement as could the disability of a spouse or parent . Moving capital from your current income stream is critical to develop a retirement fund . As crucial as returns can be , unless there is a movement of capital there isnt anything for those results to work with . If you are employed you should certainly understand your employers pension plan if one is offered . Under normal circumstances the company pension plan will provide the greatest opportunity to shift capital into a retirement fund . If you are the employer there are some opportunities for you to provide for your retirement . Many of these are complicated and require expert assistance . The bottom line is that you do have opportunities . Individuals can also establish Individual Retirement Accounts -LRB- IRA . -RRB- This also applies to spouses that are not gainfully employed . The contribution is limited but if started early enough can make a significant contribution to the movement of capital into your retirement fund . You might have heard of a Roth IRA and that too can become an important part of your retirement fund but it has different rules and you should consult with a tax consultant and a Retirement Income professional about that . The second half of the issue is the way that money is withdrawn from your retirement account . This whole subject is really complex and involves a lot of decisions but the basic thing is to understand the need for a budget . Without a budget you can not set a withdrawal rate and you can not know how long your retirement fund will last . Most Americans resist budgeting but it is something that can be started easily and can be started even today . While you might not be retired you can start to record your expenses . The longer you do this the better handle you will have on your spending . The more detail you use in your record keeping the more your budget projections will increase in accuracy . There are assets that most people do not consider as they come into retirement . The first is their ability to work . If there is something that you enjoy and are good at you should prepare to move into that activity when you retire and with some planning that can be an income producing activity . This can be anything from consulting to a hobby that you love and from which you are able to earn money . Some people write some take photographs ; others sell hand made products at trade fairs . These types of activities can enhance your retirement fund by reducing the need for immediate income . There are , of course many other issues to consider such as housing , long term care and legacy goals but if you can get these two principles started you will be well on your way to providing a satisfactory and predictable retirement .
Anyone who wishes to save money for retirement should consider a Roth IRA . This is particularly true if you are currently in a rather low income tax bracket . The key is that the deposits are made with after tax dollars and the money withdrawn is not taxed at all , unless it is withdrawn before age 59 and a half . Many people will not move to a lower income tax bracket when they retire and a Roth IRA is ideal for that situation . There are other advantages to a Roth IRA . To find out if you should by a Roth IRA , just take a picture of yourself and go to the internet where you can have the picture morphed to age 65 . When you have that picture , ask the picture if you should buy a Roth IRA . You are never too young to begin saving for retirement because you might spend almost half of your life retired . If you are working for a company that offers a retirement program , that is the first place to look . What you are looking for is the maximum amount that your employer will match of your contributions and what you must do to get those matching funds . This is free money and is the best place to save money regardless of other difficulties you might see with the plan . At the same time check the vesting schedule to see if you will be able to actually receive those benefits depending upon how long you reasonably expect to work for the company . Since your company controls all the investments that your retirement plan might have , you might want to think twice before contributing more than the amount required to get the maximum matching funds . It is worth noting that the company sponsored plan is probably covered under ERISA and that gives you some guarantees you can not get elsewhere . The whole financial world is out looking for additional contributions that you might want to make to your retirement . This is where you need to make a decision about a Roth IRA . My first advice is to get a planner with whom you are comfortable . Some planners dont listen well and you really want one that will listen to your dreams and aspirations . The planner you want will communicate clearly with you and with any companies that help manage your money . It will be his job to match your dreams to your abilities to provide for those dreams . If your planner constantly boasts about his advice and returns on investment , look for the exit . High returns on investments often go hand in hand with disastrous results . The fundamental thing to remember about retirement planning is that return on investment is not the key issue . The key issue is shifting consumption . When you move capital to your future you accomplish your mission . Fundamentally , saving for retirement is consuming less now so you can consume more lately . The return on investment is frosting on the cake . Many who leaned on return on investment found themselves unable to retire in 2008 . That is still burned in many peoples memory . Without stepping into your planners shoes , I would like to point out that you are probably in a lower income tax bracket now than you will be in the future . This makes it important to consider a Roth IRA as your funding vehicle . While not giving you a current tax break it does provide a retirement benefit that can not be obtained elsewheretax free income . There are other significant benefits but being able to drawn down a tax free account is a wonderful option .
To start planning for retirement , you should begin to think of how you will generate the income that you have now once you are in retirement . To do this , you simply determine what amount of money will be needed when you retire to generate the income that you now earn . You can then calculate the amount of money you will need to save accumulate this sum of money by the time you wish to retire . There are other quicker rules of thumb like saving 15 % of your income , but you should be careful not to fall into a false sense of security about how well retirement will work out simply by savings a certain amount determined by a broad rule of thumb .
The Roth IRA is designed to supplement retirement income . Since retirement can extend 20 to 30 years past retirement additional income is often needed . Many experts say youll need 70 to 100 per cent of your pre-retirement income in retirement . Inflation will erode the buying power of your retirement income and must be considered . Pension plans may not replace the amount of pre-retirement income necessary . The taxation on pension benefits and traditional IRA accounts can also erode the buying power of these qualified pension plans . A Roth IRA is made with after-tax money . There arent any age limits on participation and they can be paid in addition to contributions made to your employer-sponsored plan . Contributions can be made on behalf of a non-working spouse . Regular adjusted gross income limits apply . The Roth IRA premium is coordinated with traditional IRA premiums and is reduced at higher adjusted gross income levels . Currently the maximum contribution possible to a Roth IRA is $ 5.500 when you are under age 50 and $ 6,500 per year when you are 50 years old and older . When a Roth IRA is more than five years old it can be used for retirement , tax-free . After five years the Roth IRA can be passed to heirs tax-free . You can use the money in a Roth IRA at any time for qualified education expenses without the normal 10 % early distribution penalty tax . You can withdraw up to the total of your payments without income tax or the additional 10 percent penalty tax . With a Roth IRA you have access to your earnings . You can withdraw earnings income tax free and without the additional 10 penalty tax if you have had the Roth IRA for at least five years and are over 59.5 years , disabled or are using the money for a first-time home purchase . It pays to start your Roth IRA as early as possible and fund it as fully as possible . Because all gain in the Roth IRA is not currently taxed there is a significant compounded rate of return . This will help develop your financial well-being . One of the key considerations is taxation . With a Roth IRA contributions are made with after-tax dollars . The money received in retirement is paid in tax free dollars . If you are currently in a very high tax bracket , the Roth IRA might not be the best choice , however , if you are in a fairly low tax bracket you will find that receiving the money tax free in retirement makes good sense . Most retirement programs are subject to mandatory distributions that start at age seventy and a half . These force you take money out of a plan and pay current income tax . A Roth IRA is not subject to a mandatory distribution and that inconvenience and expense is not required . In the final analysis , tax-free money is great . By carefully planning expenditures you can use the tax-free money to keep you in a lower tax bracket in retirement and potentially save a great deal of money . The money in your other pension plans is actually jointly held by you and the government . With the Roth IRA , it is all yours .
In order to determine how much you need to save for retirement , you first need to define what a successful retirement means to you . The next step is to do a budget to determine what is needed to finance your desired lifestyle . This is a better approach than simply randomly choosing a % of your current income . There are calculators available on many websites to help you determine how much you will need to save to generate a specific retirement income . Given the complexity of retirement planning though , you would be best served working with a financial or retirement planner . There are resources and additional information on Retirement Planning on my website , www.jpw.ca . It includes a Retirement Planning Checklist that will save you time and money . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
First of all , put money in tax advantage accounts . Deposit funds into Roth-IRAs , municipal bonds , life insurance policies and 529 college savings plans if you have kids . When clients open these accounts , they normally do not have to pay taxes when the money is withdrawn . Why ? The client is contributing to these accounts with after-tax dollars . Next , protect yourself by obtaining disability insurance , long term care coverage , health insurance and buy life insurance . Clients need life insurance so that loved ones can pay the bills and have funds to provide for the family . The long term coverage will help just in case a client needs care in a nursing home . Reduce your liabilities as soon as possible . Get out of debt and stay out of debt . Set aside at least three to six months of your monthly salary . There might be a change in employment , there might be an accident , or repairs to the home or car . Here is a brief overview that will help clients plan for retirement . Start early . For example , if you save $ 10 a day for 30 years and invest the money at 8 % per year , you would have almost $ 450,000 for retirement . Moreover , if clients saved $ 20 a day for 30 years at the same rate , he or she would have almost $ 900,000 for retirement . This is why the concept of using tax advantage accounts is so important . Here is a good rule of thumb when planning for retirement . According to the Financial Analysts Journal , `` Americans need to save 22 times their income '' to retire comfortably . What does this mean ? Clients that make $ 40,000 a year , need $ 880,000 when they retire -LRB- i.e. $ 40,000 x 22 -RRB- . Keep in mind that this is only a tool to use that will help you with your retirement planning . Finally , clients need to take into consideration their home mortgage balance -LRB- s -RRB- , the kids college education costs and life insurance needs . I will be glad to help you meet your retirement planning goals . I listen to all my clients first . Then , we develop a plan and then we execute that plan . I can be reached at 912-631-3186 .
How to plan for life after retirement requires that you determine what retirement success means to you and then determine what you need to do to fund it . Your successful retirement includes : healthy aging , family relationships , meaningful activities , spirituality , a balanced life plan and more . A lifestyle planner can help you if you are interested in more detail . -LRB- Some offer online programs -RRB- There is also more information on retirement planning available on my website www.jpw.ca . Your financial planning questions may include : How much money will I need to retire ? How long will my money last ? When can I retire ? What about my business ? What is my optimum product and asset mix ? Do I want to leave a legacy ? and more . Retirement planning is extremely easy to continuously put off . The earlier you start the better . If you are within 10 years of retirement or slowing down , then it is time to get serious . The first step is to take the first step with your retirement or financial planner . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for , retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . It will be the same in your community . If you have further questions , or feel I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Ideally planning for retirement should start as soon as we start working . Why ? Chances are we will make it to retirement and be there longer than we are in the traditional workforce . In short , the sooner you start saving the more you can take advantage of compound interest . A pilot has a checklist to be sure nothing is left out . I suggest you use one to help plan for your retirement , it will save you time and money . It is a shameless plug , but you will find one at www.RetirementPlanningCheckList.ca that you can use as a guide . Here is brief overview : First you need to decide , what a successful retirement means to you and then choose a retirement date as a focus point . Next determine , what it will cost to fund your retirement goals . Do a retirement budget , etc. . Once you determine the cost , how much you need to accumulate and need to save can be determined . Examine and co-ordinate the various sources of retirement income . Review your employee benefits to determine what you will need to supplement with personal plans . If you are self employed , you will need to address what is going to happen to , and with , your business . Succession planning needs to be addressed . Ensure your estate plan is up to date with what you want to happen after you are gone - will , beneficiaries for insurance and retirement account , etc. . Keep your spouse informed and be sure to have a Personal Record Organizer that provides the location of your important documents . Choose a financial planner to assist you . Take action , get started . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . There is additional information on retirement planning and business succession planning on my website . www.jpw.ca
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Is Long Term Care Insurance Program ?
The Long Term Care Insurance Program you may be referring to is the Federal Long Term Care Insurance Program . It is a program that provides group long term care insurance to federal employees , US Postal Service employees and annuitants , active and retired members of the uniformed services , and their qualified relatives .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
The Long Term Care Insurance Program you may be referring to is the Federal Long Term Care Insurance Program . It is a program that provides group long term care insurance to federal employees , US Postal Service employees and annuitants , active and retired members of the uniformed services , and their qualified relatives .
If you do not have an estate to protect then you may not need Long Term Care . If you can qualify for Medicaid or a Medicaid waiver program then you do not need long term care . If you do not mind spending down all you have worked for during your life to go on Medicaid then you do not need long term care . If you have an estate you want to pass to your heirs , loved ones you want to protect from the burdens of caring for you when you become sick and can no longer care for yourself then you do need long term care insurance . If you want choices on where you are cared for then you need long term care .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
The Federal Long Term Care Insurance Program -LRB- FLTCIP -RRB- provides long term care insurance for enrollees who are federal employees , USPS employees and active and retired members of the uniformed services and their qualified relatives . It is sponsored by the US Office of Personnel Management -LRB- OPM -RRB- and was introduced in 2002 by Long Term Care Partners LLC , a joint venture of MetLife and John Hancock . Since 2009 , John Hancock is the sole sponsor of Long Term Care Partners . The FLTCIP was specially designed to meet the needs of the federal family . The features and benefits are monitored by OPM and is on its second version . Qualified applicants are underwritten in a manner similar to LTC insurance sold to individuals by John Hancock and others . Go to the website for the program to find extensive information .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
In my opinion there are three factors that regulate the size of the long-term care insurance market : - Fear . No one wants to consider , discuss , or especially visualize themselves as unable to take care of normal daily activities of elderly life . Its almost as if some people say , `` If I do n't think about it , it wo n't happen to me '' . There is great anxiety over whom among their relatives or close friends might end up being their caregiver . Many people are scared that they wo n't be able to afford the cost of long-term care . They simply do not want to `` go there '' . It is too scary . - Denial . `` If I ever get that way , just take me out in the back yard and shoot me '' is the classic sign of superficial denial . Such a statement is not made with any degree of sincerity , but what it really says is that the person knows it could happen and that they do not want to live that way and be a burden to their spouse of extended family . But , not to worry . There must be a government program out there that will take care old people that have nowhere to go when they ca n't take care of themselves . Certainly , in a country as rich as ours , no one will allow another to die alone or in the gutter . - Lack of experience . The vast majority of people age 45-65 have not had to care for an elderly relative or close friend . They have no idea of the psychological and emotional energy expended in taking care of a person 24/7/365 . They have never gotten an invoice from a skilled nursing service or had to go shopping for a facility and compare prices for monthly care , nor have the ever even been inside a nursing home and seen the conditions that some elderly have to endure because they did n't have a choice . To turn the question around a bit : Who are the people that do buy their own long-term care insurance ? Most of those that do have gone through personal care giving . They know the challenge . They know the commitment . They know the costs . They know the sacrifices that others in the family have to go through . They know that extended , expensive , long-term care can effect two - even three - generations.About 8 % of the American population has purchased their own long-term care insurance . About 17 % or more of that same population is going to need two years or more of skilled long-term care , either at home , or in a facility or both . Medicare is currently footing about 30-40 % of that bill . As the boomer demographic moves through the age of needed care , who is going to pay for it ?
Under Medicare any type of Home Health Care is limited . They will provide some skilled care on a temporary basis but Medicare generally will not pay for custodial care in any long term care environment . That is why it is important to carry some type of Long Term Care Insurance that will provide Home Health Care . Some policies even pay family members for providing care . A good agent who does long term care planning can help you find a program that will help .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
I am going to take a stab at this as I am not quite sure what the question is . Health Insurance is not necessarily long term unless you have it for a long time however you may switch between different plans . If you are asking what is Long-Term Care Insurance then I will also answer this : Long-Term Care provides a benefit when you have chronic illness needs . Pays for Nursing Home & Care programs , assisted living situations , in-home support and more .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Which Companies Sell Long Term Care Insurance ?
In recent years there has been a reduction in the number of Long Term Care Companies . Some of the remaining carriers are Genworth , Mutual of Omaha , and Transamerica . `` Hybrid '' policies are relatively new option for Long Term Care . Contact a local agent for addressing the options available your specific needs .
There are not many standalone long term care insurance policies being offered in the current market . There are very few long term care companies remaining in the market , those that are left are reliable . Here are some the players in long term care Genworth , John Hancock , LifeSecure , Mutual of Omaha , MedAmerica , Transamerica , Niche carriers are : Equitable -LRB- STC -RRB- , Aetna -LRB- STC -RRB- and Lincoln -LRB- Linked Benefit -RRB- .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
The agents who sell Long Term Care Insurance are licensed in Health Insurance . However , many life insurance companies also sell Long Term Care Insurance , and many agents who specialize in Life Insurance also sell Long Term Care Insurance . You can input `` Long Term Care Insurance Quotes '' in a search engine to bring up a list of companies and how to reach them , or a broker who sells their products .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
A health insurance license is needed to sell long term care insurance . Also , there is a partnership long term care education course that is required to sell long term care policies . However , many of the same companies that offer life insurance are the ones that offer long term care insurance , in addition to some companies that mainly offer health insurance .
To sell Long Term Care Insurance you must be licensed in Health Insurance and also take training about partnership long term care insurance . You must be understand the different aspects of long term care insurance , or use a broker who can explain those for you . The hardest part about selling long term care insurance is that it is difficult for many to afford , or part with , the premium , and the part of human nature that says `` that will never happen to me '' kicks in . But if you have the right market -LRB- people with assets to protect and enough income to pay the premium -RRB- and understand the implications of long term care insurance yourself , it helps .
To find who sells long term care insurance in Missouri , you can put in those words on an internet search engine , and a number of good choices will come up in your search results . There are Long Term Care brokers , or else agencies that sell Health or Life insurance also can be contacted to see if they sell Long Term Care Insurance . Many of the contributors to this website sell LTCI , including our agency , and would be happy to assist you .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
The best Long Term Care insurance for one person may not be the best Long Term Care policy for another . Look at the rating of the company and the features of the policies they offer , in addition to see if they are priced competitively , their history of rate increases , and whether they have had many complaints against them . Above all , it is helpful to contact a Long Term Care broker -LRB- may Life insurance brokers also sell Long Term Care insurance -RRB- to help you find the best Long Term Care policy for you .
Payments of long-term care claims by an insurance company are generally not taxable as regular income . However , the policy title page must clearly state that the policy is a `` tax-qualified long-term care insurance policy '' or `` TQ '' . Some carriers still sell `` non-tax-qualified '' long-term care policies -LRB- NTQ -RRB- in which the benefits may be taxable as regular income . The reasoning is that NTQ policies are more generous in qualifying someone to go on claim and that other policy features may provide a broader range of care . Whether those attributes would offset the possible taxation of the benefit is debatable . Most long-term care policies today are `` TQ '' .
Long term care insurance can be bought from agents licensed in health insurance . Many of the same companies who offer long term care insurance also offer life insurance . So try contacting a website or office that sells either of these products to see if they also sell long term care insurance .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
How Long Has Long Term Care Insurance Been Around ?
Long term care insurance is a relatively new form of insurance . It has been around since the early 1970s . In those early days , it was primarily seen as `` nursing home '' insurance that provided indemnity benefits . Indemnity policies pay a specified amount for each day of covered services regardless of the actual costs incurred by the insured . It has evolved beyond this limited beginning to reimburse the insured for costs he or she incurs for comprehensive covered services in one 's home or in a nursing home or assisted living facilities up to a daily , weekly or monthly maximum stated by the policy .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Yes , Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance . In fact , she is the primary caregiver for her mother who lives with her in Florida . In an article written forSun Times Media , LLC , dated Sept. 4 , 2012 , she relates how difficult it has been taking care of her mother . Although Suze Orman had - and still has - the means from her business to take care of the costs of long-term care insurance , she reports that she tried and tried to get her mother to sign off on an LTCi application , but she refused to do it . Her mother said she would n't ever need it and that it would be a waste ofmoney . It costs approximately $ 25,000 / month for Suze to keep her mother at home and have the best quality care around the clock . That 's about average for 24/7 home care with skilled nursing . If Suze 's mom were to go into a Nursing Facility , the cost would be much less , but would still be from $ 7,000 - $ 12,000 per month , depending on whether she had a semi-private or private room . Suze indicated that as a young professional financial advisor , she saw `` clients who would spend all the money that they had earned over a lifetime on a long-term care stay . '' She advised that , `` If you can afford LTC insurance and you are in your early 50s or older , now is the time to look into getting it . '' But , she also cautions that if you ca n't , '' ... dont buy it because you will end up dropping it and wasting your money . '' She concludes her article with the irony of her own personal situation with regard to buying long-term care insurance . `` Over the years , I have had some health problems that are fine today . But , when I went to get my own LTC insurance policy two years ago I was denied for recent health reasons . If I had just gone one year earlier , that would not have been the case . '' -LRB- Suze Orman donated her fee for writing the article to Blue Planet Network , which aims to bring sustainable safe drinking water to people in rural communities around the world ; blueplanetnetwork.org . -RRB-
Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance to their clients around age 50 . But the purchasing trend of long term care appears to be around age 60 . However , if youre family has a predisposition to disease , chronic hospitalization or nursing home confinement when theyre old , you may want to consider long term care insurance when youre young and healthy . You should purchase long term care for your retirement years . The statistics are significant that youll experience a need for assisted living or perhaps nursing home confinement . The average married couple spends $ 250,000 on medical and extended care during their retirement years . Securing long term care is important , especially when youre healthy and heading into your late fifties , early sixties .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Long term care insurance is a morbidity product that is underwritten on the basis on medical and behavioral information . Medical information is based on your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . Behavioral information is based on motor vehicle records , vocational and recreational hazards . Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance with the clients around age 50 . But the buying public tends to purchase long term care insurance around age 60 . A couple of considerations here : You want to buy long term care when your healthy an relatively young to afford the premiums . But even if youre healthy , whats the predisposition of your family regarding assisted living and nursing home confinement ? If theres negative health history , then buying long term care earlier may be more prudent .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Term Life Insurance can sometimes be converted to help pay for long term care expenses through a program called Long Term Care Benefit Plan . The same is true for Whole Life , Universal Life , and Group Life Insurance . When someone is applying for Medicaid , they may find that their cash value policy has too high a face amount , and must be surrendered . Others facing the need for long term care may have Term coverage they no longer need . The Long Term Care Benefit Plan uses a formula of the face amount of the policy , the premiums being paid , and the health care needs of the policy owner to determine how much can be paid monthly to the institution or person providing that care . It also allows a small percent of the death benefit to stay in effect for funeral costs . The conversion does not change your Life Insurance to Long Term Care Insurance . Rather , the money is placed into an irrevocable account that is professionally administered . Long Term Care Benefit Plans are legal in all 50 states , and can be used with policies that have been in force over two years .
If you have assets you want to protect then you should consider Long Term Care Insurance . You have a one in four chance of needing some type of long term care in your lifetime . The average Nursing Home cost is between $ 6000 and $ 8000 per month , Assisted Living is around $ 4000 to $ 5000 per month . Home Health Care is around $ 15 to $ 20 per hour . It will not take long to go through any assets at these rates . Then the option will be Medicaid . If you want to protect your assets then Long Term Care is an excellent way to do so and will be far less expensive in the long run .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance with the clients around age 50 . But the buying public tends to purchase long term care insurance around age 60 . A couple of considerations here : You want to buy long term care when your healthy an relatively young to afford the premiums . But even if youre healthy , whats the predisposition of your family regarding assisted living and nursing home confinement ? If theres negative health history , then buying long term care earlier may be more prudent .
According to most sources that gather such information , the percentage of the population of the United States that owns some type of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs is around 7 % and holding . While theprobability of needing some type of extended-care for performing daily activities before death is quite high -LRB- about 1 in 4 will need up to 2 years of long-term care , slightly lower for men and higher for women -RRB- , two human factors come into play when the discussing transferring the payment of costs for such care to an insurance company : fear and denial . People are generally afraid to even consider how awful it would be to not be able to successfully perform common daily activities and need help from someone to do so . Families assume that since mom and dad took care of them as babies , they will take care of mom and dad when they need roughly the same type of attention and care . Thus , they console their elderly parents not to worry and fret about it . Others are simply in denial . `` Just take me out back and shoot me '' is a common demonstration of denial . One agent I know told me about an adult daughter that took her dad up on that . She asked , `` When should I shoot you ? '' Her father said , `` I 'll tell you when '' . So , when he started to need help getting around and the daughter offered to help , she held up a toy gun and asked , `` Now ? '' The father said , `` No , but soon . '' Of course , his condition became worse and worse until finally , he needed to be admitted to full-time care in a facility . The daughter asked again , as she had over the years , `` Do I shoot you now ? '' But , by this time , the only response her father could give was a tear . He had lost his ability to speak . Cost has become a real deterrent to the purchase of long-term care insurance . However , those that have had to go through the experience of taking care of an aged loved one usually find some way to afford at least some amount of insurance to pay for possible long-term care costs . This insurance is not about the insured . It 's about the care-giver . Approximately 7 % of Americans have figured that out .
In my opinion there are three factors that regulate the size of the long-term care insurance market : - Fear . No one wants to consider , discuss , or especially visualize themselves as unable to take care of normal daily activities of elderly life . Its almost as if some people say , `` If I do n't think about it , it wo n't happen to me '' . There is great anxiety over whom among their relatives or close friends might end up being their caregiver . Many people are scared that they wo n't be able to afford the cost of long-term care . They simply do not want to `` go there '' . It is too scary . - Denial . `` If I ever get that way , just take me out in the back yard and shoot me '' is the classic sign of superficial denial . Such a statement is not made with any degree of sincerity , but what it really says is that the person knows it could happen and that they do not want to live that way and be a burden to their spouse of extended family . But , not to worry . There must be a government program out there that will take care old people that have nowhere to go when they ca n't take care of themselves . Certainly , in a country as rich as ours , no one will allow another to die alone or in the gutter . - Lack of experience . The vast majority of people age 45-65 have not had to care for an elderly relative or close friend . They have no idea of the psychological and emotional energy expended in taking care of a person 24/7/365 . They have never gotten an invoice from a skilled nursing service or had to go shopping for a facility and compare prices for monthly care , nor have the ever even been inside a nursing home and seen the conditions that some elderly have to endure because they did n't have a choice . To turn the question around a bit : Who are the people that do buy their own long-term care insurance ? Most of those that do have gone through personal care giving . They know the challenge . They know the commitment . They know the costs . They know the sacrifices that others in the family have to go through . They know that extended , expensive , long-term care can effect two - even three - generations.About 8 % of the American population has purchased their own long-term care insurance . About 17 % or more of that same population is going to need two years or more of skilled long-term care , either at home , or in a facility or both . Medicare is currently footing about 30-40 % of that bill . As the boomer demographic moves through the age of needed care , who is going to pay for it ?
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Does Kaiser Accept Medicare Patients ?
Yes , Kaiser does Accept Medicare Patients . I would recommend contacting a broker to talk about your options with Kaiser . Be sure to understand and review all the benefits you have . I continue to hear about people who get upset when it comes time to pay for services . There is a lot of confusion .
Everyone who is 65 or older must sign up with Medicare . Medicare is the primary coverage for everyone over age 65 . Every other plan integrates its benefits to Medicare . When it comes time to pay for services Medicare pays first and then passes the bill to a supplemental insurance company or in this case HMO . From the patients viewpoint this is a seamless operation .
Yes , Kaiser does Accept Medicare Patients . I would recommend contacting a broker to talk about your options with Kaiser . Be sure to understand and review all the benefits you have . I continue to hear about people who get upset when it comes time to pay for services . There is a lot of confusion .
Kaiser Permanente provides affordable healthcare to millions of consumers . Individual , family and business coverage is provided to consumers under the age of 65 and also to persons that are eligible for Medicare . Kaiser offers Medicare Cost and Medicare Advantage plans that provide Medigap benefits over and beyond the coverage Medicare provides . Kaiser has a highly-skilled network of physicians , hospitals and facilities that work for you . The CMS -LRB- Centers For Medicare And Medicaid Services -RRB- gave Kaiser one of their highest ratings for 2013 . Some of the criteria used in judging included customer service , preventive care and prescription drug services . An experienced independent broker and/or a reputable website will provide specific plan information and free rate quotes for Kaiser products .
ObamaCare currently has no impact on Medigap policies that would be obvious to the senior consumer as being directly attributable to ObamaCare . It does n't phase them out or end them and they are n't subject to the more direct attacks this administration has made on Medicare Advantage plans . The effects of ObamaCare on the Medicare population will be more subtle . Even before ObamaCare was passed , Medicare reimbursement rates were at levels where growing numbers of physicians were making business decisions to limit the number of Medicare patients they would take in their practice , freeze their number of Medicare patients at current levels , or stopping accepting Medicare patients entirely . While going through all the legislative and budgetary gyrations that resulted in the passage of ObamaCare in 2010 the administration deemed it critical that the projected 10-year cost projections of the law come in under 1 trillion dollars . Why ? Because that was approximately what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the argument was that if we could afford to spend that much on wars then surely we could afford to spend that much on providing health insurance . An important aspect of how this was accomplished from a budgetary perspective was that the law transfers future funds from the Medicare trust funds to pay for various aspects of ObamaCare . It was projected that these transfers would reduce the future increases in spending on Medicare over the coming decade by about $ 700 billion . In Washington speak this means that we 'll still be spending more on Medicare -LRB- which with our growing Medicare population is only logical -RRB- but we 'll be reducing reimbursement levels to doctors , hospitals , etc. , by $ 700 billion less than would have otherwise been the case . From studies I have seen , this will begin taking Medicare reimbursement levels below those of Medicaid in the not too distant future . So , if many healthcare providers were barely breaking even or losing money on Medicare patients at the old reimbursement levels it does n't take much imagination to guess what their reaction will be to even lower reimbursement levels in the years to come . So , the main challenge many senior citizens on Medicare will be faced with in coming years that is severely aggravated by ObamaCare will be finding healthcare providers who are willing to accept them .
Yes . Kaiser Permanente does provide Medicare Advantage plans . Kaiser Permanente is not to be confused with the Kaiser Family Foundation that provides a great deal of insurance information to the public . You can contact an independent insurance broker for a quote . The Kaiser Permanente 's website is WEBSITELINK
Kaiser Permanente does offer Medicare Advantage plans in some areas . The Kaiser Permanente model is an HMO . When you have a Medicare Advantage HMO plan you have a limited network and must use their doctors and approved hospitals . If you receive treatment out of network , you are responsible for those charges -LRB- except in an emergency -RRB- . Kaiser Advantage plans are good as long as you understand how they work and the ares where you have no coverage .
Though many will claim Obamacare , which is designed to cover non-Medicare beneficaries , does not have any effect on Medicare , such a statement would be false . There are many provisions in the Affordable Care Act that call for funding reductions in the Medicare payment system , including a provision , including the following : * Medicare Funding Cuts of $ 457 Billion by 2020 . Approximately 50 % of cuts are proposed to come from Medicare providers in the form of reduced reimbursement rates . These cuts are expected to offset 30 % of the cost of reform for those under 65 . * Fewer Providers expected to be available 96 % of Providers in US Accept Medicare 80 % Accept New Medicare Patients -LRB- 60 % in Texas -RRB- Medicare Enrollment Growing by 10,000 people per day 28 % of New Medicare Recipients Has Trouble Finding A New Primary Care Doctor in 2012 30 % Proposed Reimbursements Reductions will lead to even fewer doctors accepting Medicare More Providers Opting-out of Medicare System -LRB- including the Mayo Clinic -RRB- Fewer Doctors + More Patients = Longer Wait Times * Medicare Advantage Funding Cuts $ 135 Billion through 2019 , including $ 7 Billion this year 2014 , . This has already lead totewer Plan Choices , Reduction in Benefits andHigher Premiums for many . * Tax Increases 3.8 % Additional Medicare Tax on High Earners 3.8 % Tax Increase on Investment Income 2.3 % New Tax on Medical Devices $ 72 Billion in New Taxes to Insurance Companies These taxes that will eventually by passed on to consumers in form of higher prices ! * Closing the Donut Hole * 50 % discount on brand name drugs * 7 % discount on generics * Consumer Rebates for Reaching Gap * By 2020 , the Donut Hole will be replaced with 25 % cost sharing on all medications * 3.4 million Americans Will No Longer Fall in to the Donut Hole Each Year * 27.5 million Americans that Never Reach the Donut Hole Will Pay More for Their Drugs * More Free Preventative Care Services are now availablerventions for tobacco users * Creation of Accountable Care Organizations and Independent Advisory Board Accountable Care Organizations - places a degree of financial responsibility on the providers in hopes of improving care management and limiting unnecessary expenditures . ACOs that lower the cost of care for their members will by paid 50 % of the cost savings generated by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services . Independent Advisory Board Goal of reducing the per capita rate when growth in Medicare spending exceeds targeted rate . Board will recommend changes that become a bill and sent to the President and Congress to pass . If not passed , Congress must provide a budget with equivalent funding cuts .
Medicare is a fee for service program . A doctor or hospital can agree to accept Medicare patients and thus contract with Medicare to accept the rules and conditions imposed by Medicare , or they can opt out of the Medicare program , in which case a medicare patient would be responsible for payment if they go to that doctor or the doctor can simply refuse Medicare patients . The same is true for hospitals or other facilities .
If a hospital accepts federal funding they are obligated to treat Medicare patients . They are also required to bill Medicare for any services rendered to Medicare patients . If the hospital accepts Medicare assignment , they are not allowed to balance bill Medicare approved charges . They are allowed to bill the patient for unpaid deductible and coinsurance as well as any Medicare denied service charges .
Medicare pays doctors according to a set schedule for each procedure . When a doctor treats a patient on Medicare he accepts assignment . In other words he agrees to accept what Medicare pays . For example , a doctor may normally charge $ 1000 for a procedure . Medicare may only approve $ 500 . The doctor has agreed to accept that $ 500 . Medicare will then pay 80 % of the $ 500 and the patient pays 20 % . The doctor is not allowed to bill for the balance .
Doctors as a general rule are not refusing Medicare patients . However it is not unusual to find that a particular doctor is not currently accepting new Medicare patients . More common are the number of doctors that accept new Medicare patients but only if you do not have a Medicare Advantage plan .
No you do not need a medicare supplement or medicare advantage plan . That said , your life will be much easier to deal with medically if you do have the above mentioned plans . As Bob mentioned an unlimited 20 % hole in your coverage has the potential to put you on the street . Also , many medical offices are not accepting patients with just medicare anymore as they are being asked to take a financial hit with each medicare patient as medicare does not pay full cost of care for services received . Medicare is a deep discounted program and for many practices the idea of not getting some relief from payments from the other insurance plans just does n't work for them .
There are actually three Medicare contractual options for physicians . Physicians may sign a participating -LRB- PAR -RRB- agreement and accept Medicare 's allowed charge as payment in full for all of their Medicare patients . They may elect to be a non-PAR physician , which permits them to make assignment decisions on a case-by-case basis and to bill patients for more than the Medicare allowance for unassigned claims . Or , they may become a private contracting physician , agreeing to bill patients directly and forego any payments from Medicare to their patients or themselves.Physicians who wish to change their status from PAR to non-PAR or vice versa may do so annually . Once made , the decision is generally binding until the next annual contracting cycle except where the physician 's practice situation has changed significantly , such as relocation to a different geographic area or a different group practice . To become a private contractor , physicians must give 30 days notice before the first day of the quarter the contract takes effect .
Great Question . While you can cancel most insurance plan at anytime Kaiser is no exception . Call Kaiser or your local agent that sold you the health insurance plan and cancel it . Make sure you have a replacement plan in case you get sick or need to see the doctor later .
Speaking from experience , I like Kaiser . I like the ability to walk into one facility and get all my needs met . That said , I know of people who have had bad experiences with Kaiser so it really is about what do you want in a medical facility or doctor .
Kaiser individual major medical plans vary greatly . Premiums are based on gender , age , zip code , plan design , tobacco use , and BMI -LRB- body mass index -RRB- . Premiums in Georgia will range from around $ 100 monthly to several hundred dollars per month . Some believe Kaiser premiums are inherently lower than most other carriers since they are a not-for-profit organization . That is a false assumption .
No . Kaiser does n't offer Medigap plans . They primarily feature Medicare Advantage and some stand-alone part D prescription drug plans . Medigap plans are standardized so who provides it does n't change the coverage you receive . Only the price is different between carriers . If you need help looking for a Medigap plan , please send me an e-mail or call me and I will be happy to assist with getting the coverage in place and answer any other questions you may have I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
Medicare Part A covers hospitalization benefits . It covers all costs for most hospital stays , except there is a deductible of about $ 1260 in 2015 . All out-patient benefits are provided by Medicare Part B . These include doctor visits for illness as well as wellness care , testing etc. . Note that you must pay for Medicare part B . The cost is generally about $ 105-110 / mo , unless you are in a higher income bracket . There is a deductible for Part B benefits also . It is $ 137 in 2015 . Medicare Part B covers about 80 % of the costs of out-patient care if the service is provided by a practitioner who/which accepts Medicare . A Medicare Supplement could pay much or all of the deductibles and co-pays under Medicare . You must continue to pay the Part B premium . If you choose to be covered by a Medicare Advantage Plan , INSTEAD of Medicare , you must continue to pay the Medicare part B premium .
Some Mayo Clinics will accept Medicare patients but only as a non-par provider . Mayo does not accept assignment . Mayo will file claims with Medicare on your behalf as required by law . Medicare will adjudicate the claim , and if approved , will send payment for their portion to you . Mayo does not participate in crossover .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Do Life Insurance Companies Test Your Blood For ?
Life insurance companies can test your blood for many items contained in a screening . They may include nicotine , drug use , cholesterol levels , lipid levels and many other items that help the insurer determine the best rate to offer . A broker can help you determine the best insurer to use based on your results .
Medicare Part B-covered Diabetes Supplies : Blood sugar -LRB- also called blood glucose -RRB- self-testing equipment and supplies are covered as durable medical equipment for all people with Medicare Part B who have diabetes , even if you dont use insulin . Self-testing supplies include : Blood sugar monitors Blood sugar test strips Lancet devices and lancets Glucose control solutions for checking the accuracy of testing equipment and test strips . Medicare Part B covers the same type of blood sugar testing supplies for people with diabetes whether or not they use insulin . However , the amount of supplies that are covered varies . If you use insulin , you may be able to get up to 300 test strips and 300 lancets every 3 months . If you dont use insulin , you may be able to get 100 test strips and 100 lancets every 3 months . If your doctor says its medically necessary , Medicare will allow you to get additional test strips and lancets . Medically necessary means that services or supplies are needed for the diagnosis or treatment of your medical condition and meet accepted standards of medical practice . You may need to keep a record that shows how often youre actually testing yourself .
Medicare Part A will cover blood tests done as an inpatient in a hospital or skilled nursing or rehab facility , and Part B will cover blood tests done as an outpatient in any setting , when the blood tests are ordered to diagnose or monitor a condition or disease . Medicare Part A and B does not ordinarily cover routine blood screening . However , some preventative screenings have recently been added to the blood tests that are covered under Medicare part B : diabetes screening for those who are high risk for diabetes , one blood test every 5 years to test cholesterol , HIV tests for those who are high risk or pregnant , and prostate cancer screening yearly . For specifics see this brochure : WEBSITELINK
Not all policies need a blood test for life insurance . There are a number of affordable No Exam life insurance policies for those who do not want to take a blood test . That being said , the blood test helps the life insurance underwriters better see what health risks might be present . These include liver disease , diabetes , and high cholesterol , among others . The blood test also helps verify if the applicant has used tobacco or illegal drugs . When risk is calculated accurately , rates are assessed more fairly , and the security of your life insurance is strengthened .
Some tips to prepare for your paramed exam start a couple of days prior to your exam . First try to schedule your exam early in the morning . It is best if you can fast , no food or water 12 hours prior to your exam . If that is just too long , at least fast 8 hours minimum for your best blood and urine results . Get a good nights sleep prior . You will test better when well rested and early morning is when your blood pressure will be the lowest as well as your weight . It is not a drastic change but sometimes a point or a pound can drop you to the next tier of ratings which leads to lower premiums . Experts recommend not doing any vigorous exercise 48 hours prior to your exam . If you work out regularly , go light for the 2 days leading up . Exercise can increase proteins , which can lead to false positives on your blood work . If you smoke , try to refrain before your test , as it can elevate your blood pressure . If you smoke an occasional cigar or pipe , you need to be 14 days clean in order to get the cotine out of your blood stream . A few life insurance carriers will give you nontobacco rates for occasional use , but you must test nicotine and cotine free to receive these rates . Underwriters test for cotine because it stays in your system 14 days longer than nicotine .
Marijuana use is and has been prevalent in the United States for a very long time . It is the most widely used of all recreational drugs today , and is used by people of all walks of life . Its active chemical , commonly known as THC has been proven to help those with rheumatic diseases , ocular conditions or certain mental illnesses and is a known relaxant . Whatever your stance is on the use of illegal drugs , it is likely that at some time in your life you have encountered marijuana , and for many it remains a concern when applying for insurance . Does the use of Marijuana make me ineligible for life insurance ? If you use marijuana , you may be a little concerned about taking the required exam to get term life insurance fearing that if marijuana use is detected , you may be ineligible for coverage . Fear not . Marijuana use , by itself is not something that will make you ineligible , but it is something that is tested for . Of course , the results of the test may come back negative , but the questionnaire will probably also ask whether you have used any illegal drugs in the past five years . If the answer is yes , again , you should be able to qualify for life insurance . If marijuana shows up in your blood test , the chances that you will be able to qualify for the most desirable rating class are somewhat diminished , and if they show up not all at -LRB- but you answer yes to the question about marijuana use -RRB- your chances are diminished somewhat . Will I get a smokers rate if I use or have used marijuana ? Each life insurance company follows different guidelines , but generally , you will not be charged smokers rates for life insurance if you have used or are currently using marijuana . If my life insurance blood tests positive for marijuana use , will this information be reported to law enforcement or the government in any way ? No . By law , your medical records are protected . The report will go to the MIB , but you give your consent to this when you fill out the life insurance application . The MIB stands for Medical Information Bureau , and it is a non-governmental agency which provides services to health and life insurance companies across the U.S. . The information submitted to the MIB is not accessible to the government . Is there any way to get life insurance without taking a blood test ? Yes ! There is something called No-Exam life insurance which does not require an exam of any kind . Depending on the amount applied for and whether they require a blood test for that amount they will . The question about drugs is always on the application regardless of amount so if you were to answer honestly -LRB- suggested -RRB- they would know . In some cases you are simply rated as a smoker . Other companies may decline you . I suggest you work with a broker who knows what to look for in a company .
Life insurance tests blood so that they can more accurately assess the rate you will be charged , or if you are able to qualify for the life insurance policy at all . Blood tests can tip them off to diseases that the applicant may not be aware they have , such as type 2 diabetes or liver disease . Blood tests also uncover nicotine or drug use that is not admitted on the application . By testing blood , the insurance company helps assure their own solvency , and in turn , protects all who hold policies with them .
Yes , ING Life Companies will test for drugs in the presence of blood or urine in order to issue a life insurance policy . The only way to avoid such testing is to get such a small face amount that no blood or urine test is needed , or to apply for a No Exam life insurance policy that does not do those tests . Even then , they will normally ask about illegal drug use on the application . With some companies , the presence of marijuana in drug tests will not affect the rate too much . If the test shows signs of cocaine , meth or other illegal substances , then the policy would most likely be declined .
Generally , expect no medical tests for under $ 100,000 coverage in most cases . Over that , expect a 15 minute interview with a paramed technician during which they will want both blood and urine samples . For $ 1 million or more , expect a sitting EKG as well or possible an exam by an M.D. . The blood will be mailed to a lab and tested on a comprehensive basis , which will show results of about30 different blood readings . You have to ask for a copy of that report if you want to see it . We always recommend that our customers ask for a copy of that blood lab report to keep . That blood report is looked at very closely by life underwriters because it can often reveal problems or coming problems . And if you do n't like the results of the insurance company 's blood test report , you can always have it repeated easily at the doctor or hospital of your choice , at your cost of about $ 45 .
The blood test used for life insurance exams tests for HIV , cholesterol and other lipids , drug use , cotinine -LRB- a metabolyte of nicotine -RRB- , liver function , kidney function , and blood glucose . While not testing for specific diseases , the blood test results can point to a variety of diseases and further documentation may be ordered if exam results are questionable .
In order to prepare for your exam you first will need to exactly what is going to happen . In other words , are you going to give blood , urinate in a cup , get a resting EKG , answer medical questions , etc. . You should ask your agent what information and test that will be requested . It is best to have an 8 hour fast before the blood and urine so you get the best chance of accurate readings . -LRB- So do n't get your blood drawn right after eating a big greasy burger . The extra cholesterol will show up and mess up your NORMAL levels -RRB- . the resting EKG you should be relaxed as well as for the the blood pressure test which they will normally take 3 readings . For the medical information , be sure you know your history including doctors and their addresses . The more you can provide if necessary , the easier underwriting will be .
The exact tests that are required for an exam a person will take will depend on several factors - their age , the amount of coverage they 're applying for , and the carrier they 're applying to . Each carrier has their own underwriting guidelines so some may have different exam requirements than others . For middle aged individuals , you will most commonly see an exam consist of 3 parts : 1 -RRB- Paramedical exam - checking your height/weight , your pulse , and going through the medical questions 2 -RRB- Blood Test 3 -RRB- Urine Test The urine test is the primary method for testing for drugs . Markers in the blood can also show evidence of drug use . One recommendation is know which carrier and which of their programs you are going to apply for . You do n't want to take an exam before completing the application process because if you apply to another carrier than you may have originally intended , you may have to complete extra testing because that 2nd carrier may have more markers they check for -LRB- therefore extra exam requirements/tests -RRB- than the other carrier . Ideally , you want to have everything in order and make sure it 's right so you only have to do it once . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Only policies that use medical underwriting will test you for drug use through a blood and/or urine test . Simplified issue policies do not order blood tests , but they usually do ask about drug use on your life insurance application . Guaranteed issue life insurance does not ask about drug use on your application , nor does it test for it . However , the minimum age for guaranteed issue life insurance is usually at least 40 years old . If the drug use that you are referring to is marijuana , that generally is not a problem , if you apply with the right companies . Using marijuana after a recent DUI or after treatment for addiction is problematic . And of course , using cocaine , meth or heroin makes it difficult to get all but the most lenient -LRB- and therefore , most expensive -RRB- of life insurance policies . Talk to a life insurance agency that you can trust to find out what type of policy is workable for you , at the lowest possible price . They are bound to privacy and no insurance company will see your name unless you actually apply for the policy .
You can claim blood tests if the tests were medically necessary to diagnose or monitor a health condition , and if the testing was done by someone is enrolled in Medicare . If done on an inpatient basis , it is covered by Part A . If done on an outpatient basis , it is covered by Part B . If the test was done for preventative purposes , it will not be covered by Medicare . If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan , it may cover blood tests not covered by Part A or B.
A life insurance urine test along with a blood test with larger policies are checking for two categories . The first series is looking for drugs , both illegal and prescription to test against medical records for abuse . Underwriting will test for nicotine and cotine , which stays in the system longer than just nicotine for tobacco use . The second set of tests are used to check for diseases like cancer , diabetes , heart disease , blood disorders , kidney disease , etc. . These results are usually compared to the individuals medical records for their risk assessment .
While life insurance does not test directly for cancer , the blood or urine test can reveal labs that might point to cancer . Total blood count -LRB- showing excessively high or low white or red blood cell counts -RRB- would be the most obvious , but abnormal liver labs or even high protein in the urine could be examples of other tests that COULD indicate cancer . That is why , if labs are abnormal , insurance companies will often postpone until you can get a diagnosis for those results . Once the condition is treated , they will pick up where they left off .
Most health insurance applications do not require blood or urine specimens . But on occasion an underwriter will ask for a physical exam including certain tests . If you have a history of abnormal test results in the past , such as high cholesterol counts , or blood or sugar in your urine , testing may be requested . Sometimes an underwriter will request an EKG if you had cardiac tests in the past that were abnormal .
Yes , life insurance does test for the byproduct of nicotine , called cotinine , in the urine and/or blood that is tested for a life insurance exam . Cotinine is a more reliable indicator of actually smoking a cigarette than nicotine is , as sometimes nicotine tests can detect second hand smoke . With tobacco such as cigar or pipe , a very few companies will disregard cotinine in the blood or urine as long as it it disclosed on the application and there has been no cigarette usage in the past few years . Other than that , the insured person who tests positive for nicotine/cotinine will be rated as a Smoker .
What tests are run for life insurance depends on the coverage applied for and vary somewhat by company . For smaller amounts there may just be a non-medical declaration and depending on whether or not anything is declared there may be no testing . If urine , and/or blood , is required , testing could include testing for bodily functions . The presence of raised levels of certain substances , such as sugar in urine , would trigger more tests . In addition , testing is done for nicotine and for traces of illegal drugs . X-rays , electrocardiograms or other tests could also be required . It is very important to be truthful when completing an application for insurance . If you have a medical condition you are concerned about , then experience and independence are important . I suggest working with a local agent/broker . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Life insurance tests urine for medically underwritten life insurance policies to detect drug and nicotine usage , among other things . Urinalyses can show evidence of diabetes -LRB- or poor diabetic control -RRB- , renal disease , cancer , blood disorders , or infection . Not all life insurance policies require a urine test ; nonmed policies do not perform blood or urine tests .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
How To Calculate Long Term Care Insurance ?
Long term care insurance is a morbidity product that is underwritten on the basis on medical and behavioral information . Medical information is based on your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . Behavioral information is based on motor vehicle records , vocational and recreational hazards .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Similar to disability income insurance , long-term care insurance has an `` elimination period '' . This is like a `` time deductible '' during which one has to pay out-of-pocket for care costs while satisfying the elimination period . Elimination periods are chosen by the applicant and are usually 30 - , 60 - , 90 - , 180 - , or 365-days . The longer the elimination period , the lower the premium.Some carriers provide a 0-day elimination period for home care , either as part of the policy or as an extra-cost add-on rider . If a person goes on claim at home , they may receive approved claim payments -LRB- reimbursement plan -RRB- or cash -LRB- indemnity plan -RRB- as soon as they are declared eligible for payment by the carrier . The contract indicates what the insured needs to submit to the carrier in order to be approved for payment of care costs or to receive a cash payout.There are two ways an elimination period may be satisfied : - Service Days . The insured must pay for care on any given day in order to satisfy one day of the elimination period . For example , the insured has chosen a 90 day elimination period . The insured must pay for long-term care services out-of-pocket for a total of 90 days -LRB- they do not have to be consecutive -RRB- before the elimination period is satisfied . If the person is paying for home care , satisfying the elimination period could take longer than 90 consecutive days if care is not needed on any given day or days . Carriers may have different ways of calculating the fulfillment of the elimination period using the `` service days '' method . - Calendar days . The elimination period is satisfied when a majority of days during the elimination period required care and the insured paid out of pocket . In other words , the insured does not have satisfy the elimination period with days where services were paid out of pocket . Each carrier defines how the elimination period is satisfied using the calendar day method . This method is often offered as an additional cost rider.If a person goes immediately into a full-service nursing facility , the elimination period will be fulfilled as care is received . All facility care will need to be paid out-of-pocket by the insured or the insured 's family during that period of time . It wo n't matter that much which type of elimination fulfillment method is used in such a case unless the person leaves the facility before the elimination period is fully satisfied.Some carriers do not offer a calendar day method for satisfying the elimination period . Some have a choice between the two . Some carriers only have a calendar day elimination period . Once the elimination period is satisfied in full , it does not have to be satisfied again . Since the way a carrier allows for the fulfillment of the elimination period can be the difference in hundreds - if not thousands - of dollars in out-of-pocket payments , the prospect for long-term care insurance should make this a priority question before choosing a carrier . Be sure that you read the section of a specimen or sample policy on `` Payment of Claims '' so that you understand how the proposed insurance company defines `` when long-term insurance kicks in '' .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
To calculate how much Long Term Care Insurance to purchase , you should first find out what the average cost of nursing home care is in your area . Then , consider your own income . You could buy a LTC policy that covers the full cost of your nursing home care . Or you could save policy premium by subtracting the amount of your income that you can pay for your care , from the total nursing home cost , and just purchase Long Term Care insurance to cover the difference .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
Yes , a physical is required for Long Term Care Insurance when applying for an individual plan . When working for a business that offers group Long Term Care Insurance , a physical will generally not be required . The physical required for individual Long Term Care Insurance helps the insurance company determine your health risks , tobacco status , etc , all of which enter into the calculation of your LTC premiums , and help them decide whether or not your application can be approved .
This is really dependent upon the company through which you 're insured . Not all companies use the same scale when it comes to insurance scored . There are many different ways to use financial data to compile an insurance score , and each company gets to choose how it 's calculated . The funny thing is that they probably ca n't tell you how it 's calculated because they probably do n't know . They 'll pay an outside vendor whose business is to compile this data into a score , and there are many different models by which they do this . I 've seen scores as high as 900 and as low as 400 . However , this does n't really mean anything until you can determine what your score means to your premium . Every company applies credits to a different degree . For some , 600 may be a big discount . For others , 600 is considered rather low . it all depends on your company and how they apply credits . In general , your insurance score will follow your credit score , the higher , the better . To find out how that applies to you , talk to an agent you can trust and they 'll explain how it works for your company .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is Key Man Disability Insurance ?
Key Man DI -LRB- also known as Key Person DI -RRB- is a coverage that would pay benefits to a business to cover the financial loss if a vital employee became disabled due to an illness or injury . Any business that would find it hard to replace an employee , or any business that wouldnt be able to function without a specific employee , needs Key Man DI . And if a company had more than one key person whose absence would bring the business to a halt , then DI can be purchased for more than one Key Man . ''
Key Man DI -LRB- also known as Key Person DI -RRB- is a coverage that would pay benefits to a business to cover the financial loss if a vital employee became disabled due to an illness or injury . Any business that would find it hard to replace an employee , or any business that wouldnt be able to function without a specific employee , needs Key Man DI . And if a company had more than one key person whose absence would bring the business to a halt , then DI can be purchased for more than one Key Man . ''
Key man life insurance is for an employee in a business or organization whose loss would put a financial strain on that business or group . Some types of persons who should own key person insurance are top sales people , people who have much knowledge based on years of experience , managers of lots of employees , and/or key decision makers . All these positions take time to develop and to find the right person to replace that key employee . The key man insurance provides money to do the recruiting and operation while the key person is being replaced and trained .
A Key Man Life Insurance policy is life insurance that covers the life of key persons in a business . These are employees who represent the top producers and/or leadership in the company , and who would take some time to replace . Key Person insurance provides money to keep the business in the black while this new key employee is found . Key Man Life Insurance can be Term or Permanent , and it can be owned by the business or by the employer .
One example of key person life insurance would be to guarantee a quick and easy sale of the business upon the owner 's death . For example If the owner has a wife and children that are not active in the business and would have no idea how to run it , they would probably sell it in a distressed manner if the owner died unexpectedly . If he has a key manager that would be the likely person to sell it to they can purchase a life insurance policy on the owner 's life with the key man as the policy owner . The business can bonus the money to pay the premium to the key man . An attorney will write up a buy-sell agreement and the if the owner dies , his manager has the money and an agreed on price to buy the business from the widow . This makes the transition much easier for the widow PLUS has the benefit of keeping your key employee from straying off and being attracted to greener pastures . When there are multiple business owners , they each need a life policy on each other plus a legal agreement so they can buy out the spouse 's interests if one of them dies . They do n't want a business partner just because she/he happened to be married to their former business partner .
Key Person -LRB- Key Man -RRB- is a life insurance policy purchased with the intention of compensating the business for the loss of services of an important -LRB- key -RRB- person due death . Often the key person is a `` rainmaker '' that is responsible for a significant portion of the business revenue . In some situations the loss of the key person can create a financial strain on the business , even to the point of forcing the business to close or sell at a loss . In a key person life insurance plan , the key person is the insured ; the business is the owner , premium payer and beneficiary . Key person premiums are not tax deductible to the business . The policy proceeds are not taxable .
The reason businesses buy key man life insurance is to help the business survive when a key principal or employee dies . Even if the business must be closed due to the death of that employee , the death benefit paid out by a key man life insurance policy can help pay the business close in an orderly fashion , rather than file bankruptcy .
The term Key employee or key man or business life insurance all deal with the same type of life insurance policy . It is a term or permanent life insurance policy owned and paid for by the companywith the company named as the beneficiary . The sole purpose is to recover a financial loss incurred by the sudden death of this `` key man or woman '' . The person is so important to the business success that a business could actually go under or have to restructure .
Key man insurance is a form of business insurance . The key person is generally responsible for the profits of the company . If that person were to suddenly die , the company might find it difficult to replace them . The death could cause a sag in profits . Creditors might take a different look at the company if the key man is dead . The business will need cash to survive .
Traditional Key Man Disability Insurance is a form of Short Term Disability Insurance that is used to cover key -LRB- hard to replace , executives , top salespeople , etc -RRB- employees in a business . The business is the beneficiary . The income paid to the business when the key person is disabled helps the business to operate until the employee is back on their feet , or gives them the funds to find a replacement .
Key Life Insurance , often called Key Man or Key Person Life Insurance , is a policy that is taken out on a `` key '' employee of a business . The business usually pays for the policy and receives the benefits so that it has the funds to look for a new employee and not suffer financially in the interim , if that key employee should pass .
Key Life Insurance , often referred to as Key man or Key person Life Insurance is usually purchased by business The business is the beneficiary to receive funds to aid in the transition in the event of the Key employee 's death .
Along with the answers above , another type of important disability coverage is Key Man -LRB- or Key Person -RRB- disability insurance . This is purchased when a business has a sole employee who 's absence would drastically affect revenue and production . The benefit is paid to the company and can go toward myriad areas , including employee salaries , production , resources , etc. .
I am not sure life insurance is a bother . You should purchase life insurance if you have a loved one in your life that depends on your income , would be saddled with your debt or would be responsible for your final expenses , i.e. funeral if you died today . If these statements are not true , then do n't bother with life insurance on a personal level . However , if you are in a business partnership or key to a business success then perhaps you need life insurance known as buy/sell insurance or key man insurance . This is if the business would suffer without you or your partner or a key employee . If these aspects do n't exist , then perhaps you should not bother with life insurance at all .
Some companies will take out life insurance on their key employee -LRB- s -RRB- so that the business would have the resources to keep operating while trying to replace that employee -LRB- s -RRB- , in the event of their passing . This is called Key Man or Key Person Insurance . Corporate Owned Life Insurance -LRB- COLI , for short -RRB- became popular during the 1980 's as a way to cover the entire pool of employees due to the tax shelter status given these policies by the IRS . Subsequent reforms give COLI tax favorability only if such coverage is purchased on top wage earners and if they are notified of the policy in advance , and further restrictions are in the pike . As such , life insurance policies that cover all employees in the business are much less common .
Steve named several types of life insurance above here , and Peggy named the 2 main categories : Term and Permanent . However there are a number of other types of life insurance designed for specific situations . For example there are `` Buy Sell Agreements '' which is insurance designed for business partners . That type provides for the buyout of the deceased partner 's interest so the surviving partner -LRB- s -RRB- can retain the business and the deceased 's survivors do n't loose out on income . Similarly there is `` Key Man '' insurance where a company insures the life of a key person so that the company does n't suffer over much due to the death of that key person . There are joint and survivorship life policies where married couples are both insured under the same policy . One type pays the death benefit on the death of the first to die , the other pays the death benefit on the death of the last to die . That one is usually designed to pay for estate taxes so the beneficiaries of the estate are n't hit with a huge tax bill . And there are more !
Along with private individuals , as mentioned above , business owners purchase DI as well . The benefit covers utilities , employee salaries , rent , etc. . Also , if a company relies on a specific employee , or if they 'd lose a substantial amount of income if one employee could no longer work , Key Person or Key Man Disability Insurance can be purchased . The benefit would be paid to the company to offset the cost of hiring another employee , or to help with revenue while the employee recovers .
Individual disability insurance benefits are paid to insured worker listed on the policy . If a business takes out a key man disability insurance policy on an individual , those benefits would be paid to the company , not the employee who is injured . Also , with business overhead expense disability insurance , depending on the policy , the benefits could go toward a bank -LRB- if a loan was involved -RRB- or to the business owner -LRB- possibly a partner , if not the insured -RRB- .
There is not a time when an insurable interest is not necessary . The insurable interest is the reason that a life insurance contract is written . Without insurable interest all other underwriting factors are irrelevant . The sole purpose of life insurance is to protect another person or entity from a financial loss at a person 's death . Whether it is a loved one who would suffer financially due to loss of income or debt . A loan institution that would suffer loss of a debt repayment at a person 's death . A business owner with the death of a partner , buy sell life insurance , or a death of a key employee , key man life insurance . There always has to be an insurable interest to purchase life insurance .
Sometimes partners in a business will draft a buy-sell agreement . This agreement will define what happens to the business if one of the partners dies by mandating that the surviving partner buy the deceased partners share of the business at an agreed upon price . In this way each partner knows that should he die his heirs will receive a fair price for the value of the business . It also protects the surviving business owner from becoming partners with the deceased owners family . A buy-sell agreement is usually funded with life insurance policies . The partners will be the owners and beneficiaries of each other 's policies . Businesses will also sometimes take out insurance policies on key employees , known as key man insurance . In these situations the business owns the policy and is the beneficiary of the policy .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Do Any Insurance Companies Cover Medical Marijuana ?
This is a very new treatment that does n't have much support . You may have to just wait it out until new regulations are in place .
Marijuana use is and has been prevalent in the United States for a very long time . It is the most widely used of all recreational drugs today , and is used by people of all walks of life . Its active chemical , commonly known as THC has been proven to help those with rheumatic diseases , ocular conditions or certain mental illnesses and is a known relaxant . Whatever your stance is on the use of illegal drugs , it is likely that at some time in your life you have encountered marijuana , and for many it remains a concern when applying for insurance . Does the use of Marijuana make me ineligible for life insurance ? If you use marijuana , you may be a little concerned about taking the required exam to get term life insurance fearing that if marijuana use is detected , you may be ineligible for coverage . Fear not . Marijuana use , by itself is not something that will make you ineligible , but it is something that is tested for . Of course , the results of the test may come back negative , but the questionnaire will probably also ask whether you have used any illegal drugs in the past five years . If the answer is yes , again , you should be able to qualify for life insurance . If marijuana shows up in your blood test , the chances that you will be able to qualify for the most desirable rating class are somewhat diminished , and if they show up not all at -LRB- but you answer yes to the question about marijuana use -RRB- your chances are diminished somewhat . Will I get a smokers rate if I use or have used marijuana ? Each life insurance company follows different guidelines , but generally , you will not be charged smokers rates for life insurance if you have used or are currently using marijuana . If my life insurance blood tests positive for marijuana use , will this information be reported to law enforcement or the government in any way ? No . By law , your medical records are protected . The report will go to the MIB , but you give your consent to this when you fill out the life insurance application . The MIB stands for Medical Information Bureau , and it is a non-governmental agency which provides services to health and life insurance companies across the U.S. . The information submitted to the MIB is not accessible to the government . Is there any way to get life insurance without taking a blood test ? Yes ! There is something called No-Exam life insurance which does not require an exam of any kind . Depending on the amount applied for and whether they require a blood test for that amount they will . The question about drugs is always on the application regardless of amount so if you were to answer honestly -LRB- suggested -RRB- they would know . In some cases you are simply rated as a smoker . Other companies may decline you . I suggest you work with a broker who knows what to look for in a company .
Yes , indeed . Here is a sure fire way to get denied life insurance for smoking pot : Smoke it . Dont disclose this on your application . Then test positive on your insurance exam for marijuana . You will notice that the key to your downfall here is not disclosing it on your application . Trying to pull a fast one on the underwriter is a great way to get denied . And by the way : dont think about not disclosing it on your application , and then waiting a long time so it wont show up in your lab specimen . Thats insurance fraud . Not a good way to start a relationship with a life insurance carrier . Now you are going to ask , What if I do disclose it ? Will I get accepted ? Not only might you get accepted , but if you apply with the right company , you could get approved at preferred non-smoker rates ! How do you like that ? It all depends on the amount and frequency used . And you have to apply with a company who has very lenient underwriting guidelines for pot smokers . Some do ; a lot dont . But there is more to the story here . If you smoke cigarettes as well as pot , you will end up with a smoker rating . Dont forget that . Another item : many people smoke marijuana as a form of self-medication . They have trouble sleeping , so they smoke pot . They feel anxious , so they smoke pot . They feel a little depressed , so they smoke pot . If you have a history of dealing with these issues , then the underwriter will look a bit more closely at your marijuana use . If it appears that you do have medical concerns that are not being addressed adequately with medical treatment , he may not be confident that your pot smoking is purely recreational . That may affect his willingness to make an offer , and if he does so , at a low rate . By the way : I have helped people get policies who intake marijuana through a vaporizer , as opposed to smoking it . That can add an additional complication to underwriting . Some underwriters feel that is a more intense form of ingestion and has a more severe impact on your body . Something else for you to think about : any brushes with the law in relation to your marijuana use must be disclosed on your application . Remember that your legal record is part and parcel of the underwriting process . Lots to think about here , Makes you want to light up , doesnt it ?
There appears to be a wave of reconsideration of marijuana laws across the U.S. . In most cases this is in the area of medical marijuana , but many states are also taking a fresh look at recreational marijuana laws . If you truly are only a recreational user with no other factors you should have no problem getting life insurance . If you have any treatment for addiction -LRB- alcohol or drugs -RRB- , a DUI or other drug / alcohol legal problem you will have less options . Marijuana is a topic that the industry is watching closely . It is likely that underwriting guidelines will evolve in coming years , so no matter what rate you get today it would be wise to keep in touch with your agent . There is a chance that over the next few years marijuana usage will have less of an impact on your life insurance premium .
You can be denied life insurance for smoking pot , but it is certainly not a given . If you apply for a nonmed policy that requires `` no '' answers to all the questions on the application , saying `` yes '' to the drug question could cause a decline . Some companies simply lump marijuana with all other illegal drugs , and will decline for any marijuana use . Most companies will decline if marijuana is used by an addict , or someone who has had treatment for substance abuse in the past few years . However , there are many companies that will approve at standard to preferred rates , as long as the marijuana use does not affect their lives in a destructive fashion .
If you use marijuana , you may be a little concerned about taking the required exam to get term life insurance fearing that if marijuana use is detected , you may be ineligible for coverage.Fear not.Marijuana use , by itself is not something that will make you ineligible , but it is something that is tested for.Of course , the results of the test may come back negative , but the questionnaire will probably also ask whether you have used any illegal drugs in the past five years.If the answer is yes , again , you should be able to qualify for life insurance . If marijuana shows up in your blood test , the chances that you will be able to qualify for the most desirable rating class are somewhat diminished , and if they show up not all at -LRB- but you answer yes to the question about marijuana use -RRB- your chances are diminished somewhat . Each life insurance company follows different guidelines , but generally , you will be charged smokers rates for life insurance if you have used or are currently using marijuana .
I am presuming that you are asking about tests for illegal drug consumption and not just prescription medications in general . As far as health insurance goes this is a non-issue . An applicant for health insurance is not subjected to any physical exams or blood or urine tests as a condition for being offered health insurance coverage . While in the past there may have been questions regarding illegal drug usage on a health insurance application that if answered truthfully by a drug user could have resulted in their being declined for coverage in the individual health insurance market we have moved past that now . As the Affordable Care Act prohibits medical underwriting and requires policies to be guaranteed to be issued regardless of pre-existing conditions there are no such questions to be answered now . Ironically , in the individual health insurance marketplace the only drug that you can be asked about and perhaps penalized for in the form of higher premiums is for tobacco use . No questions are asked about marijuana , cocaine or other drugs . This is different from applying for life insurance where in many cases a physical exam that may include drawing blood and/or taking a urine sample are part of the underwriting process . With the expanded number of states that have approved marijuana for medical usage and the outright legalization that Colorado and Washington are now experimenting with the life insurance industry is having to adjust to this changing legal environment in their underwriting practices . Different life insurance carriers are addressing the marijuana usage issue in different ways so there is no universal standard being applied to this issue and it is an area where a great deal of evolution is currently underway and probably will be for years to come .
Yes , you can get life insurance if you use medical marijuana . If you are purchasing a medically underwritten policy -LRB- one that requires an exam and medical records -RRB- , the reason for needing the medical marijuana will enter into your rating and price . You will also most likely be charged smoker rates .
There are more and more choices of life insurance for persons who smoke marijuana in a responsible fashion . Most companies will charge smoker rates , but some will rate as good as preferred smoker . Of course , even those companies can deny coverage if there have been recent driving violations due to marijuana use , or if you have had drug treatment and continue to smoke pot . Contact an impaired risk agency to find the most affordable life insurance rates with marijuana usage .
Absolutely you can implement life insurance as a medical marijuana user ! Medical marijuana may be used in a variety of ways . If you do in fact smoke it , you may well get a `` smoker '' rating , which is n't all that big of a deal in terms of premium pricing . It is a higher priced rating that non-smoker , but not a huge difference . If you ingest the buds or the oils then the smoker rating wo n't apply ... unless of course you use tobacco .
Yes . Application of a premium surcharge for tobacco users has become more common in recent years , primarily in larger groups who self-fund their employee benefits plans as the employer has much more control of the benefit plan design and rate structure than they do with fully insured plans . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- , while doing away with pre-existing condition exclusions , does explicitly allow for the adjustment of rates for tobacco use . So , in that sense , tobacco users are the class of employees it is legal to discriminate or penalize for their personal behavior . The ACA is silent on the consumption of Marijuana which may present some interesting situations as more states move to allow the use of medical Marijuana or to legalize its recreational use .
Only policies that use medical underwriting will test you for drug use through a blood and/or urine test . Simplified issue policies do not order blood tests , but they usually do ask about drug use on your life insurance application . Guaranteed issue life insurance does not ask about drug use on your application , nor does it test for it . However , the minimum age for guaranteed issue life insurance is usually at least 40 years old . If the drug use that you are referring to is marijuana , that generally is not a problem , if you apply with the right companies . Using marijuana after a recent DUI or after treatment for addiction is problematic . And of course , using cocaine , meth or heroin makes it difficult to get all but the most lenient -LRB- and therefore , most expensive -RRB- of life insurance policies . Talk to a life insurance agency that you can trust to find out what type of policy is workable for you , at the lowest possible price . They are bound to privacy and no insurance company will see your name unless you actually apply for the policy .
In Canada , they do test for the active ingredient in marijuana . Typically through bodily fluids such as blood and urine . Any presence used to be a decline . Now recreational marijuana users are considered at the same rate as cigarette smokers by many companies . Heavy users are often rated or declined . It is very important that you are truthful when you complete your application for insurance to avoid problems at claim time . An independent life insurance broker , who represents several companies , can help you find the right policy at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
A drug test is not required for health insurance . Lab tests are an issue when a individual is purchasing life insurance policies that generally have a face value of over $ 250,000 . There are other insurance related issues that can occur from the consumption of controlled substances when they are not being prescribed by a medical doctor , and even then there can be situations that will be of reference - such as medical marijuana being listed as a qualified medical expense -LRB- due to the fact that it may be legal in ones state however it is not recognized as such by the federal government -RRB- .
Urinalysis -LRB- UA -RRB- is used by life insurance companies to detect presence of disease when applying for medically underwritten policies . Urine tests used can point to the possibility of kidney disease , UTI , diabetes , liver disease , inflammation , even cancer . Sometimes excessive exercise or dieting can affect the HOS , so try to drink a lot of water , avoid alcohol , eat balanced meals , and avoid excessive exercise in the days before your urine test . Life insurance also uses urine to test for drug and tobacco use . If you use opoids -LRB- codeine , morphine , methadone , etc -RRB- for pain , or marijuana for medical or recreational use , explain that on your application or to the examiner collecting your urine sample . And keep in mind that cotinine -LRB- a metabolite of nicotine that is detected in urine and blood -RRB- can stay in the body for a long time after using tobacco . It is best to disclose all health conditions , medications , and tobacco use to your agent ahead of time , rather than have it be a surprise on your life insurance exam . That way you can be matched with the company that will give you the best rate , your underwriter will rate you as good as possible due to your honesty , and your policy will pay out if something happens to you .
Life insurance companies do test for THC , the chemical in the blood that is deposited after smoking or ingesting pot . If they find THC in the blood , they will ask you to fill out a drug questionnaire , and from there decide how to rate you . With some companies , infrequent marijuana use does not affect your rates much at all . If you are taking a policy that does not require an exam -LRB- called nonmed or no exam policies -RRB- they will not test for pot . They do usually ask about drug use on the application .
NO . Unlike when you may apply for some levels of life insurance there is no physical exam or drug test that is administered in order to qualify for health insurance . With the latest round of implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- effective January 1 , 2014 , all major medical policies are guaranteed to be issued and can not apply any pre-existing condition exclusions or waiting periods . Your use of tobacco products can be asked about and the law does allow for a rate adjustment for tobacco usage . However , this does not extend to the use of drugs such a Marijuana for instance .
Life insurance companies do not usually test for rag weed , chick weed or dandelions . However , they do test for THC which is the active ingredient in marijuana . I can not speak to new underwriting stipulations in states like CO where recreational use is now legal , but in TN where it is illegal a person will have some issues . It is tested through a paramed exam with blood and urine samples taken .
Yes , you can smoke weed -LRB- marijuana -RRB- and get life insurance as long as you do not have a history of substance abuse . You will most likely have to pay smoker rates , just as a social cigarette smoker would pay , but they can be as good as Preferred Smoker premiums if your health is good and you do not overindulge .
If you are buying a life insurance policy that requires medical underwriting , it will test for certain illegal drugs , especially cocaine and marijuana . If you are purchasing a policy that not require an exam , no drug tests will be done . However , then the application will ask if you have taken illegal drugs withing a certain period of time .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Long Does It Usually Take To Get A Life Insurance Check ?
You will usually receive your check within a couple weeks of submitting proof of death to the insurance company in the event of a death claim as long as their are no reasons to dispute the claim . If you are surrendering your policy or taking a loan then again two to three weeks after mailing the paperwork would be normal .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance money ? Well I 'm assuming this question is how long does it take to get death benefit proceeds if somebody died that I am the beneficiary of ? If I 'm looking at that , usually it 's around 30 to 60 days . You 're going to get a form from the company . You 're going to have to fill that form out . Generally they 're going to get a newspaper clipping from the obituary and the certificate of death . Once that 's processed , you should be getting a check , sometimes even wired to your account depending on how you set it up , you should be getting a check between 30 and 60 days generally , unless the death occurs in the first to years . If it 's during the first two years of a contestability it 'll take longer because the company has the right to investigate the claim .
Usually it does n't take long to receive a death benefit check . First a claim form must be completed and returned to the insurance company , along with a certified copy of the death certificate . Certified copies of a death certificate can take a few days . Once a company receives the outstanding requirements , they will process and issue a benefit check . The check will include interest earned from the date of death to the date of issue of the check . Payment of proceeds are usually done as quickly as possible as most states have requirements insurance companies must follow in these situations .
Not usually depending on the company . If you are changing companies sometimes you could lose a discount but it depends on how the companies underwriting is set up . In most cases just having one point on your license will not raise your rates , in fact many companies , other than periodic spot checking , will only check your driving record if you have an accident or claim or at the time you take out your policy . I have seen drivers with as high as six points getting preferred rates because the company had not checked their driving record . Each company is different and each company varies on how often they check driving records .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
How long does it take to collect proceeds from a life policy ? Not all that long . Most of the time is spent getting the information together . You are going to need a certified copy of the certificate of death . Actually you should have 5 or 6 made as you will need them for other things besides insurance . When you have the paperwork together and submit , usually it does n't take long for payment to be sent to the beneficiaries . Usually about 5 working days or so with the companies I have worked with . You also will receive interest on the money held while the paperwork is being put together as part of the claim .
I 'll start out by saying that the best life insurance is the life insurance that is the right amount for your needs and is affordable to you . For the most part , it does n't matter whether it 's whole life , term life , or some combination of the two . Whole life is good for a number of reasons : It 's the best way to cover a permanent need - The dividends and cash value build over time and , over a long period of time , the cash value may be more than the premiums you 've paid essentially making it free or better . Premiums are level - the premium you pay when you first get your whole life will be the same for your lifetime . It wo n't increase and , as long as you pay that premium , you 'll always have the policy . It 's flexible - the cash value in your policy is yours and you can do with it what you 'd like . You can take a loan of your cash value or take part of it out if you need to . But , be aware this may affect your future premiums or the death benefit . The cash value grows tax deferred - You do n't get a 1099 for the gain in your policy . You only pay income tax on the gain when you make a withdrawal . The gain in the cash value comes out last - When you make a withdrawal from your policy , your paid premiums come out first and , since you already paid tax on that money -LRB- usually -RRB- , you do n't owe any income tax until you 've withdrawn all your premiums . A couple of qualifiers . My statements apply to the usual scenarios where you pay your premiums from your net income . If there is an arrangement where the premiums are deducted from your income tax , all withdrawals may be taxable . Also , the death benefit may become taxable to the beneficiary . These are higher level arrangements that would take a lot longer to explain . Bottom line , whole life insurance is good because it does things that no other life insurance program can . Used for the correct situation , it 's the best at what it does . Find a good agent that will take the time to evaluate what you need and build a program that covers what you need at a price you can afford . The best life insurance is the insurance you have in force . If you ca n't afford it and let it lapse , it does n't do anything . Trust your agent and listen to their advice .
No Medical Exam Life Insurance -LRB- also called No Exam Life Insurance , Nonmed Life Insurance , Simplified Life Insurance , Guaranteed Life Insurance , and other titles -RRB- is life insurance that does not require taking a paramed exam . More to the point , it does not require giving a blood sample , which is the part of the exam that some people want to avoid . No Medical Exam Life Insurance usually costs more than life insurance that does require an exam , for very healthy people . But for those who are overweight , get `` white coat syndrome '' -LRB- high blood pressure while having exams -RRB- , or have not had their cholesterol checked for years , foregoing an exam can result in very competitive rates . It is not unusual for someone to apply for a medically underwritten policy , get rated up for something they did not know they had , and end up paying more than the No Exam policy would have cost . Also , for those with serious health conditions , No Medical Exam Life Insurance is often the only type of life insurance available to them . Finally , many people like No Exam policies because they feel that the time spent in taking the exam and waiting for the underwriter to review their medical records -LRB- if the latter is needed -RRB- is not worth it . While it is not always an option , it is nice to have some No Medical Exam policies to choose from . Agents selling both types of coverage can help you discern which is best for you .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
There are a lot of factors that go into the price of life insurance . Every year that you get older , the price increases for insurance . It also depends on how much life insurance you are looking for . The higher the death benefit , the higher the monthly premium . Another factor to consider is your health . Life insurance is based on the insurance companys risk . If you are unhealthy or have a few high risk health conditions , you will have to pay a higher rate for insurance . It is also up to the insurance company . Some insurance companies charge more for the exact same coverage . Also , women have a longer life expectancy then men so the rates for women are usually lower . There are two types of life insurance too . Term insurance only covers you for a period of time and whole life covers you for a lifetime and you are guaranteed a payout . Term is usually cheaper because if you dont pass in the specified term , the insurance company does not pay out anything . For policies that have a large death benefit , the insurance company usually asks for an exam to be done that checks your blood , heart rate , and other key health related factors . The rate is usually higher for smokers compared to non-smokers . Life insurance rates are determined on a case by case basis .
If I had to guess on how long it takes to receive a check on a renter 's loss , I would say a good average would be 30 days . Property insurance policies , like a `` Renter 's '' policy usually have an entire section -LRB- that no one reads -RRB- outlining what you as the insured must do following a loss . Generally you have the obligation to notify the insurer promptly and submit a written summary of the items that were lost or damaged , how and when they were acquired , the cost to repair or replace them and their current value.Some claim adjusters may help you in this process , but it is your responsibility and not much happens before it has been completed . Once this `` list '' is prepared AND accepted by the insurer , policies usually state how many days the insurer has to pay you . In practice , however , I would say checks are received within a week or two AFTER your proof of loss is ACCEPTED . I would however expect insurers to question the value certain items , request additional documentation or require proof of purchase on higher valued items . I would also caution insurance consumers to make sure these lists are accurate . Entire claims can be denied because lists -LRB- proofs of loss -RRB- contain information that is questioned and found to be false . Like I had a 52 inch HD TV when it was actually an 18 inch portable you bought at a tag sale . In a serious loss such as a fire or storm loss , insurers often advance partial payments to cover the replacement of necessities or temporary living expenses until the more formal claim process is completed .
There are life insurance policies that can take a very long time to get , and there are policies that can take a very short time to get . The difference is how much is required during underwriting and how fast or slow the people working on your application are moving . While rare , No Exam life insurance exists that can literally be applied for , approved and issued within an hour . Most No Exam life insurance policies take a few days or more , depending on whether they also order medical records , and depending on how fast that particular life insurance company processes their No Exam policies . If the agent or agency you used is nonresponsive , this can also hold things up . Policies that require medical underwriting can take much longer . If you are in good health and utilize a `` quick '' app like many carriers offer , you will often need to do a long phone interview , but this can cut down your chances of the life insurance company ordering medical records . Having to wait on doctor 's offices providing medical records to the insurance carrier is the major cause of extended time during underwriting , so if that step is avoided , the process will go much faster . If your policy does require medical records to be approved -LRB- most policies requiring an exam do require medical records if a health condition exists -RRB- , you can help speed it up by calling your doctor 's office or perhaps even obtaining your medical records yourself . Also , be sure to list on your application ALL the doctors you have seen in the past 5 years , or any physicians that were involved in your diagnosis . Being able to order those from the start , rather than having the underwriter find out about them through reading one set of records and THEN having to order those additional records , can shave weeks to months off of the time it takes to put your policy in effect . Finally , if you are need to take a medical exam , take it as soon as possible . Much of the rest of the process revolves around that , so getting that out of the way quickly could help you have a policy in your hands within one month .
-- > Normal 0 If I had to guess on how long it takes to receive a check on a homeowners policy loss , I would say a good average would be 30 days . Property insurance policies , like a `` Homeowners '' policy usually have an entire section -LRB- that no one reads -RRB- outlining what you must do following a loss . Generally you have the obligation to notify the insurer promptly and submit a written summary of the items that were lost or damaged , how and when they were acquired , the cost to repair or replace them and their current value . Some claim adjusters may help you in this process , but it is your responsibility and not much happens before it has been completed . Once this `` list '' is prepared AND accepted by the insurer , policies usually state how many days the insurer has to pay you . In practice , however , I would say checks are received within a week or two AFTER your proof of loss is ACCEPTED . I would however expect insurers to question the value certain items , request additional documentation or require proof of purchase on higher valued items . I would also caution insurance consumers to make sure these lists are accurate . Entire claims can be denied because lists -LRB- proofs of loss -RRB- contain information that is questioned and found to be false . Like I had a 52-inch HD TV when it was actually an 18-inch portable you bought at a tag sale . In a serious loss such as a fire or storm loss , insurers often advance partial payments to cover the replacement of necessities or temporary living expenses until the more formal claim process is completed . Dont be afraid to request one .
When you apply for a life insurance policy , the life insurance company will nearly always check your driving record , pharmacy record , and MIB , even if you are applying for a policy that does not require a life insurance exam . They are checking for a suspended license , numerous traffic tickets , DUI 's , medications , and past health conditions the showed up when you applied for insurance in the past . If you are required to take a life insurance exam , they will check your blood and urine for HIV , diabetes , cholesterol , liver disease , other health conditions , and the presence of nicotine or drug metabolites . They will also weigh and measure you , take your blood pressure and pulse , and depending on your age and amount you apply for , may check for heart disease through use of a resting EKG or stress test .
How does long term disability insurance work ? Well you get to choose how long before it starts and how long it runs along with features that take effect when the policy is used . All of these aspect effect your cost . Actually long term disability is a very easy product to choose from as you can get a grid of waiting period and payout period on a spreadsheet to help put your policy together . You can choose when the policy starts , when it ends and if it grows with inflation or allows for partial disability and payments .
Life Insurance underwriting takes as long as it takes the life insurance underwriter to collect all the data needed to approve your policy . If you apply for a policy that does not need any exam or medical records , the process may take less than 24 hours . If they do not require an exam but can order medical records , it will take as long as it takes you or your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- to provide those records . If they require an exam , you will not be approved until at least 3 days after you take the exam . In other words , the faster you and your doctor 's office -LRB- s -RRB- respond to the underwriter 's requests , the shorter the time it generally takes for your policy to be approved . However , things can get held up if life insurance companies get behind , the paramed examiner will not work with you to set up your exam , your doctor 's office is slow to provide your medical records to the life insurance company , and/or additional medical records must be ordered weeks or months into the process . Above all , a good Case Manager who regularly communicates with you and the insurance company can shave time off the underwriting process . Using an agency that has great customer service may not only help speed things up , it may be the key to getting your life insurance put into effect , period .
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
The number of years of Term Life Insurance you should get depends on your age and the needs you are trying to cover . Your health , build , smoking status and existing coverage may also enter into your decision . Age and Needs : E.g. . If you are a young person with young children , you will probably want at least 20-30 year term insurance . At a young age you will get a great rate , and that way you will have the premium locked in until your children are on their own . If you are older , you may want to take a shorter term because your premium is higher and your children are almost grown . This is just one example of how age and needs enter into your decision . Health : If you have a chronic health condition , it is a good idea to lock your term rate in for as long as you can afford -LRB- as long as you have a need for coverage that long -RRB- . Even if your health condition remains controlled , just developing one more health condition can cause your rates to jump very high . While your health is stable is the time to lock in that rate for a long time . Build : Almost everyone who is overweight thinks they will lose weight , and many decide to put off buying life insurance until that happens . Unfortunately , even if they lose weight , they have to keep it off for some time before it will lower their life insurance premium . And in the interim , their beneficiaries have no protection at all . A cost effective , wiser option -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- for those who think they will lose weight , is to take a short term policy now . At least then you have coverage , and if you never do lose weight , you can convert your term to permanent later on . On the other hand , if you are at an ideal weight now , again , lock that premium in for as long as you can . Smoking Status : This is similar to the weight issue . If you plan to quit smoking , you may want to take a short term policy now to save money . Existing Coverage : If you already have a long term policy locked in and just need additional coverage for a short time , you might choose a short term policy . You will want to look at what you have now before you decide how many years of Term insurance to add to your portfolio . These are just some examples to help you decide how long the term should be in the life insurance you choose . Give me a call if you 'd like me to help you decide in your situation .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does The Irs Take Money From Life Insurance ?
In general , life insurance proceeds paid directly to your named beneficiary are not taxable nor are they attachable by creditors . Assuming your beneficiary invests the proceeds , then any interest or income that is drived from that investment will then , of course , be taxable and the responsibility of your beneficiary .
In general life insurance proceeds are income tax free when left to a beneficiary . Avoid naming your estate as the beneficiary unless you have a trust in place.Life insurance proceedscan be taxed if left to an estate withouta trust . I highly recommend using an experienced agent or advisor to avoid costly mistakes to your beneficiaries in the future .
Life insurance proceeds are income tax free meaning the IRS can not take money out of the death benefit paid out to the beneficiary . There are situations where the value of the death benefit can be included in the calculations of the estate for estate tax purposes . People generally use life insurance trusts when setting up the policy for estate planning purposes .
There is no income tax paid on life insurance benefits , in most cases . Life insurance does not go through probate if the beneficiary of the life insurance policy is a person . If the estate is large enough , estate taxes must be paid on life insurance . So in that respect , the IRS can take life insurance money , through applicable taxes . If you are asking if the IRS can take the proceeds of a life insurance policy if the insured person passes while owing back pay to the IRS , if the beneficiary is a person , the IRS can not take the life insurance money from the beneficiary . An exception would be if the beneficiary filed jointly with the insured , or if the beneficiary owed his/her own money to the IRS .
In 2000 the IRS started the Federal Payment Levy Program . Through this program the IRS collects overdue taxes by taking money from a variety of sources . The cost of Medicare is a tax and it appears that the IRS can take that money from other entitlements that you might receive . You do have some rights under this act which you should review . Additional information is available on the IRS website .
If you owe money to the IRS and are the beneficiary of a life insurance policy , the IRS can claim this money when it hits your bank account . If it is the benefactor of the policy who owes money to the IRS , the IRS can not take the money from beneficiary named in the policy unless the beneficiary filed a joint return with the benefactor .
When speaking of the life insurance death benefit that is left to a person , the IRS generally can not seize the life insurance proceeds from the beneficiary . There are exceptions , such as if the beneficiary filed jointly with the deceased person who owes money to the IRS . The beneficiary being a minor may also present a problem . But as long as the death benefit does not to to the estate , but to a person who is not implicated in that debt , the IRS can not take the death benefit away from you in most cases .
How does the IRS know about my Roth Contributions ? Well , they know because the place you put that money has to tell the IRS that they have the money . Part of the cost of having something like a Roth or an IRA or any qualified plan is reporting . The people that take your money must tell the government they have it .
When life insurance is left to a beneficiary , the death benefit is the property of the beneficiary . The IRS can not take the life insurance proceeds unless the beneficiary was a cosigner for whatever the IRS is seeking payment . If the beneficiary of the policy is the Insured 's estate , then the life insurance money is available to the IRS .
This is a tough question . How old are you ? What is your health ? And why are you taking the money out ? If you are older than 591/2 , you can request a distribution form from your plan sponsor or employer . The form will ask whether you want to take a single distribution or a series of systematic payments . If it is not going into a Rollover IRA , the sponsor usually withholds the taxes on your behalf and you would get the net amount paid to you either in a check or an EFT . If you are YOUNGER than 591/2 , there is a 10 % excise tax that is charged -LRB- premature withdrawal -RRB- by the IRS . So if you can , try and avoid withdrawing funds prior to your retirement and do a LOAN instead . That way you are paying yourself the interest on the loaned portion of the 401K funds , and not a bank . Depending on your plan , you may also be able to take out what they call `` in service '' distributions . These allow you to transfer your funds into IRA accounts and diversify your investments for retirement . And thanks to a recent IRS change , you can even move funds from your Retirement and create a guaranteed income stream -LRB- provided by the carrier that you purchase the product from -RRB- through a Deferred Income Annuity . Think of this like buying a defined benefit with your retirement assets that you can never outlive . I hope that this answers your question .
NO , the IRS can not take your Life Insurance . When you die , the beneficiary will receive the death benefit . The IRS will go after the estate to pay any taxes that were owed from the deceased . Probate is the place anyone who is owed money by a person who is deceased , can go and make a claim for some of the estate . As a recipient of a Life Insurance death benefit , you receive the benefit direct from the life insurance company avoiding any probate .
The most common retirement accounts for the self-employed are SEP IRAs , Simple IRAs and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s . These plans have two factors in common : up-front tax breaks and tax-deferred saving , meaning you do n't pay taxes until you withdraw the money in retirement . The Roth version of the individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is slightly different : you do n't get an up-front tax break , but your money not only grows tax free , withdrawals in retirement are also tax-free . The Simplified Employee Pension -LRB- SEP -RRB- IRA is probably your best bet.You can open one at virtually any bank , mutual fund sponsor or brokerage firm . Annual account fees are low - or non-existent . Your contribution limit is based on a simple formula : You can put away as much as 25 % of your net income , up to a cap that increases periodically to keep pace with inflation - $ 49,000 in 2010 . Money stays sheltered from taxes during your savings years , and what 's additionally appealing is a SEP 's funding flexibility . You can wait to fund the plan until you file your taxes . So if your income turns out to be higher than expected , you can make a large contribution and cut your tax bill . If you have a tough year , you can scale your contribution back . If you work alone now , but aspire to bigger things . Then a Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees -LRB- SIMPLE -RRB- IRA may be better for you . With a SIMPLE IRA , you can keep investing in the same plan after you hire someone . Though do n't forget what the plan name stands for : you have to match your employees ' contributions , up to 3 % of pay . The main problem with a SIMPLE IRA is that you can stash away no more than $ 11,500 a year -LRB- $ 14,000 if you 're 50 or over -RRB- , which may not be enough to meet your retirement goals . Also , if you need to make a withdrawal from a SIMPLE IRA plan within two years of its inception , the 25 % penalty is significantly higher than the 10 % fee you 'd be charged for early withdrawal from a SEP IRA . Both the SEP IRA and individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- make it tough on sole proprietors who try to hire even one full-time employee . SEP rules can lock you into expensive contributions . With an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , unless that employee is married to you , you 'll have to stop funding your plan or convert it to the more complex and cumbersome employer version . For that , you 'll surely need professional help , and you may even have to hire a third-party plan administrator . That does n't come cheap . The Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is an especially good choice if you are scrambling to build up your retirement savings and can afford to sock away a considerable portion of your earnings . The generous contribution formula lets you put aside more money at a lower income level than you can with a SEP IRA . As an employee , you can stash away as much as $ 16,500 . As the boss , you can contribute an additional 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum of $ 49,000 , including your employee contribution . These contributions are discretionary , so you can save the maximum in flush years and nothing in tougher times . If you and your spouse are both in the plan and enjoy a banner year , you could save a total of $ 98,000 . And if you are both 50 or older and eligible for catch-up contributions of $ 5,500 each , the total climbs to $ 109,000 . It 's also possible to take out a loan against an individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . That can be useful if you need funds during a business crunch . You can borrow half the account 's balance , up to $ 50,000 , and typically take up to five years to pay it back -LRB- provider rules vary -RRB- . That said , borrowing from a retirement plan should be a last resort , since it could seriously undermine your long-term goals . Individual 401 -LRB- k -RRB- s come with a bit of bureaucratic hassle . Once your balance exceeds a certain level - $ 250,000 in 2010 - you have to fill out an IRS form -LRB- form 5500 -RRB- every year , which adds a bit to your accountant 's bill . Before a tax law change in 2001 , Keogh plans were a popular choice for high-income self-employed people . These days , they 've been largely replaced by SEP IRAs , which have the same contribution limits but much less paperwork . Keogh plans come in two varieties : Defined-contribution . These plans have two variations : profit-sharing and money-purchase . The profit-sharing version of the Keogh is most like the SEP ; there 's a ceiling on contributions - 25 % of compensation , up to a maximum contribution of $ 49,000 in 2010 - and below that limit you can put in whatever you can spare . You also can change your contribution each year . With the money-purchase plan , you pick a percentage of income you 'll contribute every year , and stick with it . If you do n't , you 'll owe the IRS a penalty . Defined-benefit . This type of Keogh acts as a traditional pension plan , but for one key fact : you fund it yourself . You pick the annual pension you want , then contribute -LRB- and deduct from your taxes -RRB- whatever amount is needed to reach that goal . If you 're self employed and have a high income - say you 're a doctor or lawyer - this type of plan may allow you to save more for retirement than many other plans . Keoghs can be complicated to set up , and the paperwork required if you own one is considerable . If you 're interested in establishing a Keogh , consult a financial adviser .
Are we talking about fixed or variable ? I 'll assume fixed , so here goes ... Annuities , for a 5 year old : Do you know how a CD works ? An annuity is the same thing , just with a longer time until you get your money back . CD 's are issued by banks , Annuities are issued by insurance companies . Interest from CD 's are taxed each year while interest from annuities are not taxed until you take the money . Does this sound like a retirement account ? Yup , the IRS thinks so too . If you take money out before they want you to , you 're penalized 10 % -LRB- stupid government -RRB- . The longer the term , the higher the interest you should expect . CD for 12 months = low interest Annuity for 10 years = slightly more interest . Were you referring to variable annuities ? Think mutual fund account with higher fees -LRB- generally -RRB- . Now , riders ... no 5 year old would ever understand these ... except income riders . Here 's the deal : You get X percent of the balance of the account , paid to you for the rest of your life ... even if the account balance is $ 0.00 . What ? I still get paid when there 's no money left ? Yup ! That , my 5 year old friend , is an annuity -LRB- with an in come rider -RRB- . There 's a lot more to it than that . I could write a book on annuities -LRB- and many people have -RRB- . Make sure you work with a competent advisor who can speak your language . If they keep babbling about terms you do n't understand , move on and find someone else to work with .
Earned income comes from the IRS regulations as a qualifier for being able to contribute to a Roth IRA . It means you must earn compensation through work you have performed for your efforts in one form or another . There are two ways to receive earned income : 1 -RRB- Work for someone who pays you -LRB- you 'll receive a W-2 -RRB- 2 -RRB- You own or operate a business or farm -LRB- Schedule C will be filed with your tax return -RRB- The IRS defines earned income as wages , salary , tips and other taxable employee pay ; Union strike benefits ; Long-term disability benefits received prior to minimum retirement age ; net earnings from self-employment if you own or operate your own farm or business ; income as a minister or member of a religious order or a statutory employee and have income . There are plenty of categories that are not counted as earned income . Here are examples of income that are NOT considered earned income : Interest and dividends , retirement income , Social Security benefits , Unemployment benefits , alimony , child support , pay received while an inmate in a penal institution . The bottom line is the IRS wants to make sure you are performing work that will ultimately get them more tax revenue before they will let you pour more money into a tax deferred or tax exempt vehicle .
While the answer is - `` YES '' , you can combine annuities - it is important to bear in mind that some annuities have different tax treatment than others . My advice is to only combine annuity money of a similar nature with that of another . For example , an IRA -LRB- individual Retirement Account -RRB- provides a deduction on the IRS 1040 against income . Because of this feature and tax benefit , all money coming out of an IRA , both interest and basis , are taxed as income upon distribution . In other words , because of the tax deduction , distributions from an IRA are taxed as if all the money coming from the account is being taxed for the first time . An ordinary tax qualified annuity , a non-IRA annuity , incurs taxation only on the gain at the time of distribution . This exclusion formula recognizes that some of the money deposited was already taxed as ordinary income when you first earned it and this money will not be taxed again at distribution . That is why I suggest honoring the character of the money and keeping IRA 's with IRA 's , etc. . This simple rule of thumb will help relieve you of explaining years later the source or the money and help you argue successfully that some money should not be taxed . Who among us will remember 30-40 years hence how these accounts were merged ? There are a whole other set of rules for conversions and methods to avoid taxation prior to annuitization and the beginning of the payout period of your annuities . This answer covers general theory only on the idea you want to minimize taxation to the largest extent possible .
Another possibility is life insurance that has violated the corridors of risk and has been allowed to become , or was originally intended to be , a Modified Endowment Contract -LRB- MEC -RRB- . The corridor of risk applies usually to universal life insurance type policies and it is the established maximum cash surrender value of the contract as it pertains to the amount of coverage and the age of the insured . The tests prescribed by the IRS limits what remains life insurance and what gets treated as a MEC . Regulations established in the 1980 's limited this risk of abusing life insurance in this way because people discovered that universal life policies could be a great place to stash cash through the payment of excess premium in the flexible universal life policy , of which the IRS did n't like much When a life insurance policy becomes a MEC it is still a life insurance policy for death . Any pre-death distributions , however , cause the policy to be treated more like an annuity and distributions are treated as income first . That limits the use of the funds during the life of the insured . Life insurance treats policy loans as the payment of the basis -LRB- premiums paid in -RRB- first , and this feature is lost when a policy becomes a MEC . In fact , a number of tax-favorable benefits of life insurance are lost . To determine if a life policy has become a MEC , premiums are compared on a 7-pay test that helps establish the amount of premium , after paying 7 level annual premium amounts , that would pay up the policy in the first seven years after the life policy was issued . Being subjected to the 7-pay test or MEC test can occur well after the first seven years if there has been a material change in the policy . However , despite all of the latter , a life insurance policy that is stuffed with cash and violates the 7-pay MEC test down the road , has specific advantages even considering the disadvantages . One of those advantages is having more cash value than the face amount of coverage at death so you should also consider whether this life insurance became a MEC due to some specific financial or estate planning course of action taken by the decedent . Money at death under life insurance made to be a MEC are usually deliberate planning moves to pass cash or benefits of cash beyond the next immediate generation . For example , Grandpa wants to give each grandchild a sizable sum of money but wants to avoid generation skipping taxation . A MEC that pays as a death benefit is a contract paid , rather than money given . Check it out but this is another possibility for life insurance with too much cash value !
The only taxed dollars usually on an insurance policy are those used to pay the premium . The death benefit is usually income tax free . I use the word usually because there are always exceptions to the rules depending on the situation . Generally , the IRS wants a tax paid on either the money going in or the money coming out . So your retirement plan allows you to write off the money paid into the plan while it 's growing . Then when you start to withdraw those funds , the IRS applies taxes to them . Life insurance works in the opposite direction . You pay taxes on the premium collected and none on the death benefit and depending on what type of policy you 've purchased and how you 've structured it anywhere from `` none '' to some on the gains . That is why some people choose to use a life policy as a supplement to their retirement plan . The combination creates the opportunity to minimize taxes at the start and finish of your plan .
The IRS does not tax most life insurance with income tax . If a cash value policy is a Modified Endowment Contract , the cash value is taxed . And if there is interest paid to a beneficiary because they are receiving their life insurance proceeds on a payment plan , the interest is taxed . Also , money left to the estate is taxed . But as a general rule , if money is life to a person as beneficiary , that person does not pay income tax on the life insurance received . Estate taxes do apply to life insurance , if the amount of the estate is above the exempted amount .
Company sponsored retirement program can have provisions that allow participants to withdraw funds from their active program . The criteria for who can exercise these options are detailed in the plan documents which are normally available from the company headquarters . Some plans allow withdrawals to assist in the purchase of a home , to pay for education , or emergencies . The withdrawal provision will often require that the amount withdrawn be repaid and might stipulate a specific time frame for the repayment . The Internal Revenue Service looks at these withdrawals as distributions and taxes them accordingly . If the retirement fund is entirely money contributed by the employer , the distribution would be treated as ordinary income and if the employee is less than 59.5 years old an additional 10 % penalty tax is also applied . The same general taxation is applied if the employee contributes to the pension plan but the contribution has not been taxed as income . This is a salary reduction agreement . This is the most common form of pension plan today . If the employee has made after-tax contributions to the pension plan those are treated differently and some or part of the withdrawal might be seen as a return of principle . The determination of tax is done by the employers accounting firm . They will notify the employee if any tax is due . The employee must report this to the IRS which will determine if the penalty tax applies . There are exceptions to the early distributions penalty tax . If the qualified plan had an auto-enrollment feature and the employee decides to not participate in the plan , that withdrawal is an exception to the early withdrawal tax . If the amount placed in the plan exceeds the annual allowance under the Internal Revenue Code , money can be withdrawn without penalty to bring the plan into conformity . These withdrawals must be made in a timely manner . When the participant dies , or becomes totally and permanently disabled , the money from the retirement fund can be distributed without incurring the early withdrawal tax . If the money is being withdrawn from the retirement fund to satisfy a qualified domestic relation order the distribution will not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This occurs frequently in divorce proceedings . If the employee withdraws substantially equal payments over a period of time those distributions would not be subject to the early withdrawal tax . This can be quite tricky and legal and accounting advice should be sought . There isnt an early withdrawal tax on the amount withdrawn if the Internal Revenue Service has put a levy on the pension plan . If money is withdrawn to pay medical expenses that exceed 10 % of the Annual Adjusted Gross income of the employee , those distributions are not subject to the early withdrawal tax . If withdrawals from a pension plan are being done by a qualified military reservist who has been activated , those distributions will be exempt from the early withdrawal tax If the withdrawal is from the current plan to another , particularly if it is being done from one trustee to another there will not be an early withdrawal tax . If the employ has reached age 55 and is separating from service with the company , the distribution will not trigger the early withdrawal tax . To determine how this tax will affect you contact your plan administrator , accountant or attorney .
A profit sharing plan falls under IRS section 401 . Both a profit sharing plan and 401k are forms of retirement plans that allow employees to make pre-tax contributions to an account where contributions and earnings are not taxed until they are pulled out during the distribution phase . It is important to note that a profit sharing plan does not have to be part of a retirement plan . A profit sharing plan typically allows the employer to decide from year-to-year whether to contribute on behalf of participants . It would make sense that this decision follows the company 's profitability for the previous year . While there are variations of both types of retirement plans , there are many similarities between profit sharing plans and 401k 's such as the ability to take out a loan or pull money out based on a narrow definition of hardship . Both can have non-elective employer contributions . An employer can offer both a profit sharing plan and a 401k . You might find this link to an IRS publication helpful regarding profit sharing plans . WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Life Insurance Considered Community Property In Connecticut ?
Connecticut is not a community property state , so life insurance would not be considered community property there . There may be additional state rules regarding assets owned by married couples , but community property is not one of them . Assets like life insurance , specifically cash value life insurance can often be subject to negotiation regarding splitting values between parties during divorce .
Connecticut is not a community property state , so life insurance would not be considered community property there . There may be additional state rules regarding assets owned by married couples , but community property is not one of them . Assets like life insurance , specifically cash value life insurance can often be subject to negotiation regarding splitting values between parties during divorce .
I called the Connecticut Department of Insurance to make sure I got this correct . The free look period on the purchase of new annuities in Connecticut is 10 days . That is whether or not it is a replacement . Some companies give the annuity applicant longer than that , but 10 days is what is stipulated by the Connecticut Dept of Insurance .
Generally speaking , renters insurance is fairly inexpensive and something that should always be considered . The policy provides coverage for your personal belongings as well as protection for you should you be held legally liable for someone 's injury or damage to their property . Many landlords and apartment complexes here in Connecticut make having a renters insurance policy a condition of their lease agreement . This requirement takes the choice out of your hands of course . The premium charge will be based upon the amount of personal property coverage you need , the amount of the deductible you are willing to accept and finaly the amount of liability protection you want your policy to provide .
Life insurance in community property states is typically denoted as community property if community funds purchased the policy . Community property is that which was purchased after the marriage , whether or not only one person is the insured , and whether or not only one person paid the premium -LRB- unless the premiums were the result of a personal gift -RRB- . The exception is if the beneficiary is the spouse ; then the life insurance proceeds go to the spouse-beneficiary . Not all states use this method of determining community property , so check with legal counsel to find out the guidelines for your state .
I do not know of any state law that requires that one have Renters Insurance . Certainly it is not the law of the State of Connecticut . However , the law does not prohibit a property owner from requiring that their tenants carry renters insurance . Talk to your insurance professional about your needs and seriously consider renters insurance for your own protection and peace of mind .
Many companies offer renters insurance here in Connecticut . When you are shopping , be sure to review the financial standing of the companies you are considering to be sure that they are solid . When working with your insurance professional , consider the value of all of your personal belongings and do n't forget any higher value items that might be better insured specifically under a valuable items rider or separate contract . I recommend choosing the broadest and most comprehensive coverage you can afford , include replacement guarantee provisions , and at least $ 300,000 personal liability . Finally , ask if you can receive discounts by bundling your renters insurance with your car insurance .
California is a community property state . There are only a few states in this group . In California a life insurance policy would be considered community property unless it was purchased entirely with non-community property assets . This would be very unusual . The thing that is important is that the policyholder in California can not act independently of their spouse . That is the policyholder can not change the beneficiary , take out a policy loan or surrender a policy without the signature of their spouse .
There are ten community property states in the U.S. , however , Hawaii is not one of them . A life insurance policy acquired while residing in a community property state may or may not be considered community property depending on the specific circumstances of when the policy was first acquired , how the owner and beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- have been designated , how premiums have been funded , etc. .
The short answer is fairly soon if you intend to register your vehicles in your new home state . Personal auto policies , in general provide seamless coverage to you as you drive from state to state . However , most if not all states require that you show proof of auto incurance issued in that state in order to register your car -LRB- s -RRB- for regular use on their public access roads and highways . That means though you would be covered while driving through Connecticut in your Maryland registered and insured car , Connecticut DMV would not accept an insurance ID card from Maryland in order to register your car here .
If you do not have insurance on your vehicle in Connecticut , you are likely to be notified by the DMV with a notice of suspension . You will have 45 days to respond or face possible fines and/or suspension . Most importantly , you must obtain coverage and pay a fine of $ 200 . As experienced brokers , our job -LRB- among other things -RRB- is to help consumers who may have found themselves in a position where they have no coverage or a policy has lapsed . But it is the law to have existing car insurance in Connecticut if drive your vehicle .
In most cases , your car insurance will cover you throughout all 50 states . The real issue is once you move , how soon do you need to register your cars . That may vary by state regulations , but I can tell you that here in Connecticut , once one establishes residency , one has to register their cars within 30 days . In order to register a car here , like in most if not all other states , you are required to show proof of auto insurance issued on a Connecticut policy form . If you have Nationwide car insurance issued in Virginia , that will not be acceptable proof for the CT DMV so you would have to have your insurance transferred and written here before heading over to DMV .
The cost for health insurance coverage in Connecticut is based on numerous factors . If you are buying as an individual or family , then factors such as age , one 's BMI , -LRB- made up of the combined factors of height and weight -RRB- , medical history -LRB- including prescribed medications -RRB- and geographical location all come into play . Insurance carriers licensed to sell in Connecticut do not all use the same underwriting guidelines . Independent brokers are well versed in these guidelines . The best way to get an exact price is to apply for coverage and go through the underwriting process . Keep in mind , until the provisions of `` Obamacare '' become effective in 2014 , insurance companies can refuse to offer coverage to applicants that do not meet their guidelines .
Credit can be and usually is a factor used when a company developes premium for Homeowners Insurance products , but it is not the only factor . Prior losses for which you may have filed claims at previous residential properties , the condition of your current home , proximity to fire stations and hydrants or other water sources and other factors are also a consideration . Unfavoirable credit , in and of itself , would probably not keep you from obtaining coverage , though it may cause you to pay more . If you do have trouble , for whatever reason , then talk with your Insurance Professional . In Connecticut , and I suspect in most states , there are state programs that are specifically in existence to provide some coverage when one 's property does not meet the standard market underwriting rules .
The best Medicare supplement plan in Connecticut is the one that is right for you . Medigap plan F is sold more than any other plan but that does not mean it is a plan that meets your needs and budget . Shop and compare plans . Consider plans G and N and see if they might work better for you than plan F.
When comparing auto insurance in Connecticut or anywhere else for that matter , there are a few things to consider . First , the financial stability of the company offering the insurance . You want to make sure that the company that you trust with your premium dollars will be there when you need them and make good on the promises of coverage for which you have paid . Beyond that , when comparing quotes , be sure that the proposals offer teh same or very similar stated coverage . For example , you may certainly pay less for minimal liability protection , but it may cost you if you have an accident .
As my colleagues have said , it is safe to say that car insurance is now mandatory throughout all 50 states . However , it is important to note that each state has the authority to set it 's own requirement for minimum amounts of coverage . Connecticut , for example , has set a minimum liability requirememt of $ 20,000 per person / $ 40,000 per accident for boidily injury and $ 10,000 for property damage . Also required is uninsured/under insured motorist coverage with a minimum that matches the bodily injury amount . In other states , the minimums may be different . Talk to your Insurance Professional about your state 's requirements but more importantly about what coverage amount best meets your protection needs .
Life insurance is personal property . Personal property can be owned by one or more owners . Living in a community property state could present divisible property issues if the life insurance policy has cash values . Each community property state may have it 's own proprietary regulations . Consult an attorney before moving forward with any policy ownership changes .
In Connecticut , where I have been licensed since 1985 , if an insurance company needs to have proof of prior continuous insurance coverage , the declaration sheet is the preferred and universally accepted document to certify such proof . In fact , most companies co n't accept just an Insurance ID Card because they are not considered to be as strong a document . If by chance you let your old policy lapse so that there is a gap in coverage , that might be the cause of the problem . There is no reason I can think of in my experience why a valid in force declaration sheet would not be acceptable as proof of prior coverage . You could go to the Insurance Commissioner as previously suggested , but it also may be worth reconsidering your move in the first place .
Here in Connecticut , we are required to have car insurance when registering a car . The State mandates a minimal amount of Liability and Uninsured/Underinsured coverage . If you are financing the car , the finance company will require Physical Damage Coverage -LRB- Comprehensive and Collision -RRB- and will need to be listd as an interested entity on your policy . If you are leasing , in addition to the Comp and Collision requirement , Leasing companies also require Liabilitycoverage . Typically they will require that you carry Bodily Injury Coverage of at lest $ 100,000 per person , $ 300,000 per occurance and $ 50,000 for Property Damage Liability .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Who Can Get Long Term Care Insurance ?
Anyone can apply to get long term insurance , however there is underwriting involved . Unlike with life insurance , where the insurance companies figures out how long before you die . With LTC insurance , the insurance company figures out how long you will live . Underwriting can be difficult to pass if you have a history of health problems . Many Annuities now come with Long Term Care riders , in the event you need to go into a nursing home , where the account value doubles , or triples . Also a new type of life insurance policy allows an accelerated death benefit , in the event you have a critical illness , or need to go into a nursing home . This policy allows you to take part of your death benefit , while leaving something to your beneficiaries .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
The two main advantages of Long Term Care Insurance are : 1 -RRB- Paying for your long term care needs without having to spend down your assets , and 2 -RRB- Having a say in the care that you get . As Care Plan Coordinator for a nursing home , I saw the advantages of Long Term Care Insurance up close . It can enable you to get a private room , get out into your home more quickly , and other perks that are not possible when on Medicaid . Not everyone can afford Long Term Care Insurance , and Medicaid is a blessing for those who need it . But there definitely are advantages to having Long Term Care Insurance .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Everyone comes into the discussion about long term care insurance from a different angle , because we all have different experiences . As an insurance website , we rightfully describe the financial implications of the products in question . But as human beings , we interject our experiences , as well . Some of us see it from the view of the caregiver/family , having been caregivers by default for a parent who did not have long term care insurance , or watched our `` healthy '' parent struggle to care for the sick one . Some of us have adult children urging us to get long term care insurance because they know that they would have to give up homes and jobs to come care for us . Some of us see it from the view of the person needing the care . Time spent in a nursing home quickly reveals those who could have had a higher quality life living in their own home , with the resources that LTC insurance provides . There are the `` rich '' in the single room whose resources are dwindling with each passing year , and who may eventually not be able to sustain that luxury of a private room by having to go on Medicaid . No matter what angle from which you view it , there are good reasons to get long term care insurance . There are also reasons not to get it , as Mr. Bridgers so eloquently stated about both sides .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
You can get Long Term Care with some pre-existing conditions , but not all of them . Some types of pre-existing conditions are viewed by long term care underwriters as more apt to need long term care in the future than others . Some of these are stroke , MS , diabetes with side effects , dementia , and rheumatoid arthritis . These can cause a decline . Osteoporosis , depression , and other mild conditions can affect ratings and price . On the other hand , some pre-existing conditions that can cause a decline for life insurance will not affect long term care insurance at all . Contact a broker who carries a variety of long term care choices to see if your pre-existing condition will enable you to buy a long term care insurance policy at an affordable price .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The main disadvantages of Long Term Care insurance would be that you would die before you were able to use it or that you would be blessed with a long and healthy life and never need long term care before you passed away . Other than that the disadvantages are that it is becoming more expensive and that fewer insurance carriers are offering Long Term Care insurance . Of course , the reasons for this are testimony to the need for long term care insurance , people are living longer and therefore more people are having some period of need for long term care and long term care facilities are getting more expensive .
In all honesty , Long Term Care Insurance is not important for everyone . If you have very few assets and low income , you may sacrifice to pay Long Term Care premiums for extended care that may or may not be needed , and that Medicaid could cover if needed . If being able to choose your own place and type of extended care is important to you , then Long Term Care Insurance is a great thing to own even with low assets , as long as you can afford to pay the premiums . Long Term Care Insurance is most important for those who have an estate to protect . If you have saved up to pass an inheritance to your loved ones , or wish to pass a business to a successor , your intentions could be jeopardized if you were to to need care for an extended period of time . Long Term Care can pay that for you and allow your estate to remain untouched .
Long Term Care Insurance is a good purchase if there is a risk of needing nursing home , assisted living , or home health care in your future . My father waited too long to get long term care insurance , and no longer qualified for it . It would have been nice to have that extra income to help my mom care for him . There are so many ways that people can be laid up , and hospitals are reluctant to allow people to stay too long . So long term care insurance can be a very good purchase for helping those who need the care , and for those who give it .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Take Out Life Insurance On A Child ?
Taking out a life insurance policy on a child will provide a lower premium than what it will be when they are older and it provides insurability . Some policies after being issued willallow a child at different pre-assigned ages to increase the policy value without a medical exam and for only the cost of the premium for the extra coverage addedto the policy .
Losing a child myself , I HIGHLY recommend getting life insurance on your child . None of us wants to think of iosing a child , let alone plan on it but it definitely eliminates the financial burden if the unimaginable does happen . Life insurance is also so cheap for children and there are many different types you can get . The most common is a term policy which will last for a set number of years . 10 , 20 , 30 ... but then they expire and the cost of getting a whole life policy then is more expensive since the premiums go by age . I have a 20yr paid up policy on my children for $ 10k death benefit . I pay a very low amount for 20 years and they will have $ 10,000 coverage for the rest of their lives . The premium will never go up . Remember this , the best time to purchase life insurance is the younger and healthier you are !
Taking out life insurance on a child can be a good idea if there are diseases that run in your family , such as type 1 diabetes . By getting life insurance while they are young and healthy , you will pay a low premium and also be assured that they will be able to have life insurance at an affordable price for the rest of their lives . This is even if you buy Term Insurance or put a Child Rider on your own policy , as both of those choices usually allow you to convert the policy to permanent insurance , later on .
Why Buy Life Insurance For Children ? Great Question . Are you going to contribute towards your child 's future college cost ? Are you interested in giving your kids an head start in life with saving money ? I think the best thing to do is understand the benefits of whole life insurance , or index universal life insurance . When you learn about these two insurance products you will understand their are tax advantages such as tax deferred and tax free withdrawal . When you combine the tax advantages with earning a rate of return on your money while it compounds over the years than you will see why you would definitely buy life insurance for your child . The biggest asset kids have is time . It takes time for money to build over the years , and the real question is how much money do you want working in your child 's favor that 's tax free.Something to really think about . I hope this helps anyone in why they should buy life insurance for their child . .
Why should you buy coverage for a new baby ? Well three basic reasons may apply as to `` why '' ? First , if you were to lose your child , what would you do ? Would you go into work on Monday ? Would you and your spouse agree on the cost of the service and headstone ? Sorry to be blunt . A life insurance policy lets you take a breath , decide on your service and reduces the `` what can we afford to do ? '' in the situation . Second , you can purchase guaranteed insurability for your child 's future when you build your policy . These options take away the insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to your child 's future purchases , no matter their health . Finally , depending on your choice of policy , you get your child a foothold in their financial future . You are knocking out one of the foundation pieces to a financial future while the price is super cheap . One of many things down , more choices for other dollars later .
Since the purpose of life insurance is usually to protect someone from an economic loss that would be caused by the death of the Insured person , this is a good question . Why do kids need life insurance ? In light of the stated purpose , perhaps this need does not exist in your family . If the unspeakable happened and you lost a child , you may have plenty of resources to cover final arrangements , even if there were medical bills . If not , then a life insurance policy for a child , or putting the child -LRB- ren -RRB- on a child rider on your policy , would be a valid choice . However , because I specialize in Impaired Risk life insurance -LRB- life insurance for those who have health conditions or other risk -RRB- , I see the biggest advantage of kids having life insurance as ensuring they will be able to get affordable life insurance for the rest of their lives . There is a huge advantage to getting them insured while they are still healthy . E.g. . A child who develops type 1 diabetes will not be able to get a life insurance policy until they are at least 16 years old , and then far above average rates will follow them the rest of their lives . If they got even a term policy before developing diabetes , the policy can later be converted to a permanent policy at the same health rating they got before they were diagnosed . If on a child rider , they can get 5 times the amount of the rider rated Standard when they become adults , no health questions asked . There is a tendency to not think about life insurance until there is a scare in one 's health . Having life insurance as a child just takes care of it , no matter what the future brings .
The more accurate question is why do parents want to take out life insurance on their infant child ? You may want to cover final expenses in the death of the child . You may want to start a long term savings program for your child . You may want to purchase the maximum the carrier allows for the future of your childs insurability , especially if your familys health history includes chronic illnesses . But keep in mind , most life insurance carriers will not issue a policy on a child if the parents have no coverage of their own .
This question has several answers . From a financial planning perspective , the answer is thatyou would n't . The adverse financial impact of the death of a child is relatively small . While a terrible tragedy and an absolutely awful thing to go through , technically no one financially depends on them for support . So , one of the basic tenets of life insurance - to provide lost income due to premature death of a family bread-winner - buying life insurance on a child does not make sense . While children might not need life insurance , here are some reasons why one might want to buy it on them anyway : 1 . Insure the child 's insurability - this can be achieved by purchasing a small face amount of permanent life insurance -LRB- I would recommend participating whole life -RRB- with a guaranteed future purchase option rider . The rider insures that the insured can purchase additional life insurance without the need to medically qualify . If the adult child 's health goes south , additional life insurance can be purchased . Drawbacks : a -RRB- the option usually runs out at 40 or so years old ; b -RRB- typically , only the same type of life insurance can be purchased -LRB- which can be a lot more expensive at age 30 than at age 3 -RRB- , and c -RRB- if you do n't exercise the option , you lose it . Oh , and by the way , the insured usually assumes ownership of the policy at 18 , at which time , that income-tax-free cash value can be mighty handy for the down payment on that new car . So long , insurance policy , we hardly got to know you . 2 . Provide a source of money with tax-favored access privileges - This is n't likely to work -LRB- see `` new car '' above -RRB- , but if protected by a trust with strict limits on how the cash values may be used and under what conditions it must be paid back , it could allowa responsibleadult child to be his/her own bank and/or have at least somewhere to go , independently , to cover an emergency need . The problem is that even a trust can be gotten around and the cash - and the life insurance benefit it supports - is more likely to end up being spent - and lapsed . 3 . If one feels that the death of a child could seriously impact them financially , I recommend purchasing a child rider -LRB- usually comes in `` units '' , 1 unit = $ 1000 coverage -RRB- on a parent 's term or permanent policy . Twenty-five to fifty-units should be plenty to cover final expenses and maybe some medical bills not covered by medical insurance . Using life insurance to help fund college is not the best use of the money spent over the years . There are now too many other tax-favored savings vehicles that do n't include the cost of insurance to depend on a life policy to provide a significant amount of cash over a 16 or 17 year investment horizon . In the event of the death of one child , the insurance money received as a death benefit could go to help provide some start-up college money for another child in the family -LRB- # 3 would be the least expensive way for that to happen -RRB- , but that 's kind of creepy . I think # 1 is the only prudent reason to buy insurance on a child and then only when there is a family history of childhood or adult onset of some kind of genetic malady like diabetes or cardiac problems . Otherwise , # 3 might make you feel better , but it 's not likely to be needed .
I agree with Bob and Larry above and to add a little more detail about the age range : A parent can take out a life insurance policy for a child 's benefit , usually when the child is 2 weeks old . The parent does this to provide guaranteed insurability for the child and/or to provide a vehicle to accumulate money for the child . When the child is 18 or older , the parent can change ownership to the child . The maximum age that I have seen to take out a policy is 90 years old .
To take out a life insurance policy on another individual you must have insurable interest . This means that you may face a financial loss upon the death of an individual . You must also have the consent and knowledge of that individual or parent of that individual . Common examples would be an adult child taking a policy out on their parents , an employer taking a policy on a key employee , a family member such as brother or sister taking a policy out on a sibling , a grandparent taking a policy on a grand child or some companies will even allow same-sex couples to take policies out on each other as long as insurable interest can be shown .
Why is life insurance important for a child ? It creates the cornerstone of a financial plan for their lifetime while they 're still wetting their pants . What a parent can do for a child is create a policy that grows over time and can give a child future options for additional insurance that can not be denied by the insurance company . One of the most powerful gifts you can do for your children is take away an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' down the road to your child when they wish to increase coverage .
A child rider on Term life insurance adds life insurance to your policy that will cover your child -LRB- ren -RRB- . It is usually available to children age 15 days to approx age 17 -LRB- the age varies by company -RRB- . You select a face amount of the child rider , usually between $ 5,000 and $ 25,000 . This that would pay if a tragedy occurred in your family , and you lost one or more of your children . The child rider benefit would pay that entire amount for each deceased child . The rider pays for death by any reason , just as your policy does , with the exception of suicide in first two years , or if your child had a serious health condition that was not disclosed on the application and death occurred during the first two years of purchasing the rider . If your child has type 1 diabetes , intellectual disability , or other maladies , unfortunately , they will not be able to be on the rider.Therefore , it is good to get the rider while your first child is young ; then the rest are automatically added . While few children pass away , the real value of a child rider can come when your child turns approx 25 -LRB- again , the age varies by company -RRB- . At that time the child rider can usually be changed to a permanent life insurance policy of about 5 times the face amount of the child rider . They do not ask any health questions , so if your child developed an illness after being put on the rider , it will not matter . They will then have a reasonably priced life insurance policy for the rest of their lives .
Child Riders : I always offer a child rider to parents . Recently -LRB- today -RRB- I added $ 20,000 child rider a mother 's policy . It cost her a whopping $ 8.60 . Not each , but for all 4 children . So the cost per child is $ 2.15 . And if she has more children or adopts they are covered from the 15th day of life with no qualifying . No extra cost . The automatic coverage has meant the difference of being able to cover a child born with a grave illness or not . Which brings up another benefit of most child riders . Guaranteed convertibility of up 5 or 6 times the amount . In the case above when a child reaches age 25 they have the guaranteed right to convert the $ 20,000.00 rider to $ 100,000.00 Permanent plan . No medical questions , no exams , no blood work . At standard rates . That is a huge benefit . We have converted young cancer patients , a Marine in Iraq and a 25 year old that had been in a coma for years to name a few . All for $ 8.60 or $ 2.15 per child . And they can still buy individual policies on the kids . Or use the saved money to buy much more coverage on mom and dad . Individual child policies : I am also a big proponent of short paying a childs policy . Actually just about anyone under 60 that can afford the extra premium . I do not really show cash values on small policies as they take a very long time to grow and normally do not amount to much . Twenty years ago we were selling $ 5,000 Burial and Child plans . While better than nothing , the now grown children are underwhelmed with the face amount or small cash values . Today I am suggesting much larger plans . Not child plans but plans that will be worth more when they are adults and need to protect their own children . $ 50,000 , $ 100,000 or even $ 250,000 plans are not unusual and very reasonable from top rated Insurance Companies . Starting at about $ 20 . As always an experienced Life Insurance Agent is your best source of information . One that has more than one or two companies or types of insurance .
There is three reasons to insure a child with permanent life insurance . First , the reason no one likes to think about , but a child 's death is devastating on all levels , but is a possibility . Not having the money to bury a child just adds extra hardship during an extremely difficult time . Second reason is to protect the child 's insurability . Once the child has a life insurance policy , they can in most cases increase face amounts without proof of underwriting . This is crucial to a child diagnosed with type I diabetes , cancer or even worse . The third and final reason to insure a child with life insurance is the cash value . Not only can you use the policy as a teaching moment for the child to learn to save but the many uses as the child grows into an adult . Cash value from a life insurance policy can be used for emergencies , hardships , as well as college , a down payment on a first house or even retirement . Child life insurance is so affordable and important , every parent should strongly consider it for their children .
That depends entirely upon how the child support agreement was constructed . If there is not a specific requirement in the child support agreement that the person required to provide child support is required to provide health insurance for the child -LRB- ren -RRB- then there is a very high probability that they would not be required to provide health insurance . So , if the child support judgment requires one partner to just pay `` X '' amount of dollars every month for child support and makes no mention of a requirement to provide health insurance either out of that amount or in addition to it is unlikely that without a new judgment the ex-partner would have to provide health insurance . In my experience , a good divorce attorney specifically addresses this issue in writing in the order of child support as to which parent has the responsibility for providing health insurance for dependent children and even the potential duration of this requirement and the circumstances where it might be voided -LRB- re-marriage for example -RRB- . I am sure the rules on this crucial issue vary from state to state . Any couple with children who are divorcing should have this issue of responsibility for health insurance coverage clearly spelled out in their divorce and child support agreement .
Why should kids have life insurance ? Several reasons make it a good idea . First by purchasing a permanent policy you set the foundation for your child 's financial future . Think of it as raw land to be developed over time . It will be cheap but work very nicely through time . Next you can guarantee your child 's insurability down the road by the use of a rider that guarantees the insurance company ca n't say no later on . Taking away the NO is a bigger deal than you might think . How many times can you think of that being the situation ? And finally , for the worst possible thing , a child dying . The life insurance gives you a chance to grieve , pay for a service and not make lack of money make a terrible situation worse ...
I am not sure I would say that a child needs life insurance . There are two main reasons to insure a child , one is financial savings and the other is protecting insurability . Writing a whole life or universal life policy , or cash value plan , on a child has advantages to be able to save extra money for college , a first home or even retirement . The premiums are very affordable and with the right plan can have a good guaranteed rate of return on investment . The second reason is protect the child 's insurability . If you purchase life insurance on a child most all companies have a conversion clause which means the child can convert to higher face amounts , five , ten or greater times the original death benefit without proof of insurability . If the child had a diagnosis in later life and became uninsurable then they would have this policy at a very reasonable rate for the rest of their life .
why do babies need life insurance ? There are several reasons life insurance for a baby makes sense . One is simply just planning for the future for that child through a cash value policy that grows over time . Coupled with a guaranteed insurability option , a good plan takes away an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' down the road . That in it 's self is very important . Taking away `` no '' is a wonderful feeling . Another reason is what if the unthinkable happens ? Would a family need time , would they need money to have a service or even buy a headstone ? Imagine the stress of having to budget the service for your child ? How much hate and resentment would happen having to tell a spouse `` no , it costs too much '' ?
How much is life insurance for kids ? As few as a couple dollars a month upward . A parent can spend a few dollars a month and have a child rider attached to their policy and provide a small term policy for their child . Or a parent could spend a bit more and purchase a whole life or other cash value policy and create the first building block in a financial plan for their children . A big thing to consider with a child 's policy is buying the future insurability option . What this does very simply , is take away an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to your child later on in life if they wish to purchase additional life insurance . You may need to think about that one but how often can you think of any situation where you can take away an insurance company 's ability to say `` no '' to you ? The future insurability option LOCKS in a `` yes '' several times through your child 's life for a very small amount of premium .
You can take out life insurance on anyone with whom you have an insurable interest . This can be established simply by being a close family member , in the US . However , financial insurable interest must exist even with these types of relationships , with most life insurance companies . E.g. . An adult child can take out a small policy on an aging parent because of the the emotional loss that would occur upon the death of the parent . But in order to take out a large policy there must usually be financial loss . I.e. . The adult child contributes financially to their parent and are using life insurance to offset that , or their parent contributes financially to them and they would suffer financial loss upon the death of that parent .
end question
start question
health-insurance
How Do I Choose The Right Health Insurance Plan ?
Congratulations ! You have asked the question that millions of Americans are struggling with and will be struggling with for years to come . Without being self-serving to my industry , find yourself an experienced and well qualified health insurance agent to shop the market for you and to explain the fine details of the options available to you . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- has accomplished what many thought impossible - making health insurance more expensive and even more complicated to understand than it already was . Buying health insurance online , whether it 's through the government marketplaces or private sites , is not like shopping around for the best deal on a hotel room or an airplane ticket . You will encounter a bizarre world of seemingly similar looking insurance products with wildly different prices or similarly priced products with wildly different benefit designs . I guide people through this maze and it really does n't matter if they have a 10th grade education or a PhD , they are amazed at the subtle differences I have to point out that make the real differences in the health insurance products they purchase . For example , one insurance carrier here in Tennessee offers identical insurance products in the government marketplace but has three different PPO network options attached to them . The average person would look at these products , determine that the benefits are the same and so why not pick the one with the lowest monthly premium ? What they have painfully learned later is that they have enrolled in a health plan with a very narrow network of doctors , hospitals and pharmacies . The hospital a few miles from their house that they assumed was in-network because it is part of the overall health system they have been familiar with in the past turns out not to be included in this narrow network product and instead they may have to go across town or to another county -LRB- in more rural areas -RRB- to go to an in-network hospital . Another major carrier uses terms like `` Local Preferred '' and `` National Preferred '' to differentiate their products . A quick scan of the benefit summaries reveals only slight differences in office visit & prescription copays , deductibles and out-of-pocket maximums but unless you really dig deep you wo n't be able to figure out one limits your pharmacy choices significantly while the other does not . Other insurance companies whose plans people have been familiar with and even enrolled in for years have found that these company 's products have transformed into products that now require primary care referrals for visits to specialists and other services or that they provide little or no coverage outside of their immediate geographic area . Just this week I spent about 3 hours explaining his different options to a man in his early 30 's who is smart enough to run his own business and who has been my customer for 6 years . The next morning he had his mother call me so I could explain the same things to her so she could help him feel good about his final decision . This is the reality of what the average consumer is now faced with in today 's health insurance marketplace . My advice , it 's a jungle out there . Do n't go in without a trained guide and beware of these so called `` navigators '' and `` assistants '' they are unlicensed , poorly trained -LRB- perhaps good intentioned -RRB- individuals who can do little more than read the same material on a computer that you can see .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
I 'm glad you asked this question . I wish more people would before they listen to someone tell them that the lowest price is the best . Nothing could be further from the truth . For a very reasonable and affordable premium , you can get renter 's insurance that works right for you . First , pick the right limit for your personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- . there are some great tools to help you estimate this and the number 's bigger than you think . One of the best is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Next , pick the right settlement option . Actual Cash Value -LRB- ACV -RRB- : The insurance company will depreciate everything you lost and write you a check for that amount up to the policy limit . Replacement Cost : The insurance company will pay to replace the stuff you lost with new , up to the policy limit . I usually sell replacement cost because most people would rather have new stuff . Keep in mind , if you choose replacement cost , your limit should be higher than if you choose ACV . Make sure you have broad form or special form coverage on your personal property . This will ensure you have coverage for theft . Lastly , pick the right liability limit . If an agent tries to sell you a liability limit of $ 100,000 , run away and find a new agent . If you get sued , it will likely be for a lot more than $ 100,000 . Here 's the worst part , the premium difference between a limit of $ 100,000 and $ 500,000 could be as low as $ 9 per year -LRB- that 's what it is with my company -RRB- . The most important thing you should know is that a good agent will take the time to find out about you and the things you own . Then , he/she will put together the right coverage to protect you . If it costs a little more , pay it . An extra $ 50 premium might save you thousands at claim time .
That is an interesting question ! I do n't suppose that anyone can force you to do anything that you do n't want to do , but they can make it unpleasant if you choose not do do what they ask . You can choose to speed , but you might get a ticket ; you can choose to carry an unlicensed gun in your car , but if found , you may spend some time in jail . We all make choices , and some have negative consequences . Buying health insurance is the same . Does buying it make sense ? Yes it does . Your options for treatment are supposed to be the same , should you need them and you have none , but I know -LRB- at least where I live -RRB- those services are n't always provided at the best possible providers . You still get them , but ... You also pay for the services of those who choose not to have insurance , whether you want to or not , through higher prices when you do need medical help . Medical providers are going to get paid one way or another . It also makes sense to have it because if you choose not to buy it , -LRB- and help lower costs for everyone -RRB- the Government can and certainly will levy a tax fine against you , one that increases over time . Can they force you to buy ? Nope , anymore than they can force you to do anything else . I hope that answers your question , and thank you for asking it !
I agree with Drew with a few additions . Rates do vary and different people may get very different rates from the same company . In my experience , you 'll find that many companies are within 10-20 % of each other and it 's hard to choose based on the rate alone . My advice is to find the right agent first . If you choose based on who has the lowest rate , you 'll be changing a lot . When you find an agent that cares about covering you correctly instead of just selling the lowest rate , you 've found your agent . Spend more time finding the right agent and you 'll be happy . They may not always be the lowest , but they 'll save you big in the long run . We 're always bombarded with ads from insurance companies telling you they have the lowest rate . They 're selling you on the idea that insurance is a commodity , that everybody has the same thing , so look for the lowest price . Nothing could be further from the truth . Professional agents and advisors are out there and they care about their clients more than just the commission they earn . Find someone who loves their agent and go talk with them . I 've never had a client complain that their rates are too high after they 've had a claim and they were made whole again . I 've been out there at 2am when my client 's house just burned to the ground . I did n't do it because I earned a commission , I did it because these are my clients and I love what I do . So , make your life easier and find an agent who cares .
Term life insurance is available for sale through a number of channels , including online . On the surface deciding what term insurance to choose appears to be simple , who has the best initial price . In addition to determining the amount of insurance needed , there are a few more things to think about . What do the renewal premiums look like ? How long do I need the coverage ? Am I going to want to convert this to level premium permanent insurance ? What conversion options are available ? If the quote is annual , how do the monthly premiums compare ? And more . An independent insurance broker , who represents several companies , can help you find the right product at the right price . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
I know this will sound trite , but you choose a good policy with good advice which means first choosing a good life insurance professional . Also consider that one must choose the right policy , not just a good one . By that I mean , choose a policy that matches the need . If you have a temporary need , term is fine and is inexpensive relative to permanent life products . If you have a permanent need , do not buy term insurance as it is a good product but the wrong solution . Also consider the company you choose since they need to be around to pay the claim - look for top rated insurers . Again , a life insurance professional will help you with all of this .
One of the best ways to compare Medigap Plans is to look at the benefits side-by-side . Medigap Plans are standardized , so all the lettered plans have the exact same benefits with every insurance company . Choosing to work with an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance is a step in the right direction . The right agent will take the time to show you the different Medigap Plans and describe the pros and cons based on your individual needs . Here are some questions that you may want to ask yourself : Do you want to pay the annual Part B deductible ? -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Do you want to pay any co-pays or co-insurance ? Do you want all the Medicare approved charges covered so you do n't have to deal with deductibles , co-pays and co-insurance ? As I stated above , Medigap Plans are standardized -LRB- Plan G with ABC insurance company has the same exact benefits with XYZ insurance company -RRB- and the only difference is the price . Once you decide which benefits you want , your agent can shop the market for the best premium . But do n't let that be the end of the story . You will want to make sure the insurance agent helping you with this process is one that provides on-going service and annual rate reviews . Far too many times do I speak with Seniors who signed up for a Medigap plan with a great premium only to have it sky rocket years later ... never once did the original agent check in with them . Thank you for taking the time to read my response . If I can help you compare Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me 1-888-411-1329 or visit my website at www.remedigap.com .
You may think that , because you do n't own a home , you do n't have anything at risk . Nothing could be further from the truth . The only difference between a homeowner and a renter is that a renter does n't own a building . You still have personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- and you still have a liability exposure . A renters policy is just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It will cover your stuff if it 's stolen or damaged in a fire , just like a homeowners policy will . If someone gets hurt in your home , it will cover you just like a homeowners policy will . Now , be smart insure yourself properly . You 'd be surprised how much it would cost to replace all your stuff . A good agent will help you choose the right limit . You can even estimate it yourself . Allstate has a great tool on their website to help you estimate what your stuff would cost to replace -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Notice I said `` replace '' . This is an important distinction . if your stuff is damaged , it can be replaced with new , not depreciated . Be sure to ask for replacement cost coverage on your personal property . Next , pick the right liability limit . Be sure it 's high enough to protect all your assets . Do n't skimp here . Liability coverage pays if you are deemed negligent and these lawsuits are seldom small and higher limits are extremely inexpensive . Be smart and find an agent you can trust . If it costs a little more , pay it . Choose your agent first , then listen to him/her . In the long run , you 'll save money .
Unless you have a magic crystal ball that can tell you when you might have a life threating accident or illness then having a health insurance plan needs to be a part of your financial planning for your future . Notice that I said your future . No one will ever care as much about you as you ! Sure you have those folks in your life who love you but do they have hundreds of thousands of dollars to pay for your medical care if push comes to shove ? Probably not . Since the Affordable Care Act passed the Congress and was signed into law you now have an opportunity to receive guaranteed issue health insurance . So no matter how ill you may be you are guaranteed that you can purchase a health plan . Now the law does have some gate-keeper rules on when you can enroll into a plan . For now the Open Enrollment Period runs from November 15th to February 15th of each year . During that period you can enroll in a health plan , change plans and apply for Federal Assistance , called a subsidy , to help pay for your plan . For the rest of the year you may be eligible for a Special Election Period if you have gotten married , divorced , had a new child or adoption or moved from one geographical area of the country to another . If you have lost your coverage at work due to lay off , loss of job or your employer discontinuing the plan you may be eligible for a Special Election Period . You can check the various Special Election Periods online at : www.healthcare.gov or by calling a local insurance agent who can help you . By the way insurance agents have to go through special training on a government website and pass several tests to be qualified to help you choose a plan on the Federal Marketplace at www.healthcare.gov Insurance agents can help you sort through all of the plans offered on the website and help you enroll in the right plan for you . It 's important that you choose the correct plan as you are locked into that plan for the entire year . So with proper planning you can save yourself a lot of money if you become ill or have an accident and you wo n't have to rely on friends or family to bail you out . A little spent now on a health insurance premium can save you hundreds of thousands of dollars in the future .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
What retirement plan is right for you ? The right plan for you is going to be the one `` you '' actually do . Waiting around for perfect or the plan , simply wastes time . Wasting time is the biggest downfall for most people when it comes to retirements . Personally I do n't care if it 's a passbook savings account or a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- or anything , if you fail to do anything , you simply wo n't have anything . There are many options both qualified and non qualified out there to choose from . Read up and pick one that works for you and that you WILL fund . In my profession I 've seen agents make fun of little old ladies with a couple hundred thousand in a savings account . They would comment on how stupid these ladies were ... Me ? I thought they were smart . Yea , sure lots of different things they could have done , but they saved and they saved some more . They had something because they saved something . It 's the habit of saving rather than the plan . Lots of people have `` plans '' with no money in them .
An excellent question that touches on both philosophy and current politics in our nation . In the context of the rights enumerated in the U.S constitution and the natural rights of man historically there is no right to health insurance . In the grand sweep of human history health insurance is a late arrival on the world stage and mankind existed without it for millennia . As health insurance is only a financial mechanism designed to transfer risk by spreading it out over a larger pool of payers it is difficult for me to construe this as an inherent right . By that argument we should all have the right to car or homeowners or pet insurance . This is where I think many people make the mistake of confusing health care with health insurance . Health care , however primitive , has been around for thousands of years and yet Ibelieve most objective thinking people would agree that there has never been an intrinsic right to health care itself . Health insurance , in my opinion , should be viewed as , at best , a social obligation that an individual owes to their society to eliminate or at least minimize the burdens they might place on their fellow citizens and at least what a person should do in their own self interest to protect themselves against serious illness or injury . But whether it is a social obligation or an act of self interest it clearly does not fall into the same category as freedom of speech , religion , to peaceably assemble or petition the government for redress of grievances . To me , it seems that the argument that health insurance is a right is merely anattempt by some -LRB- however well intentioned -RRB- to construct a system that by its very nature centralizes control over the individual and may actually impinge upon their true rights by taking from some to give to others . An ever expanding social contract leads to ever expanding expense which serves to distort the functioning of a society built upon a premise of self reliance first and charity second .
That is a great question ! The terms used in life insurance policies can be confusing . There are three entities in a policy - the owner , the insured , and the beneficiary . The easiest one is the beneficiary - the person or entity -LRB- trust , estate , etc. -RRB- that receives the benefits from the policy . They receive these benefits when the insured passes away . The insured is the person whose need was the reason for the policy . Here 's where it can be confusing . The owner is the person who has legal rights to the policy on the insured . That legal title gives them right to change some of the moving parts of the policy , including the beneficiary . In many cases , the owner and the insured are the same person . I buy a policy on my own life . I am the owner and the insured , and I name my wife as my beneficiary . I retain the option to change the beneficiary -LRB- should she pass first God forbid -RRB- and the right to use the cash value within the policy . If I bought a policy for my children , I would own the policy , but my child would be the insured , and my wife and I the beneficiaries . I can transfer that ownership to my child once they are able to make the payments , and manage the policy successfully . Once they own the policy , they are free to change the beneficiary to whomever they choose -LRB- their wife or child , say -RRB- . Hopefully that clears things up for you . If it does n't please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it some more . Thank you for asking !
The most popular Medicare Supplement insurance policy is Medigap Plan F ; however , Medigap Plan G is right on the heels of Plan F. Plan F is popular because of the comprehensive health care coverage it provides . It will cover all your Medicare approved charges not paid by Original Medicare Part A and Part B . This means you do not have to worry about co-insurance , deductibles or co-pays . Plan G is gaining popularity because it strongly resembles Plan F . The only difference is you have to satisfy the annual Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 2014 -RRB- before your Part B benefits kick in . Once you 've met the deductible , your Plan G acts just like Plan F . Why would someone choose Plan G over Plan F ? Price . You can often find Plan G at a lower premium ... even when you include the cost of the Part B deductible . To determine which Medigap Plan is right for you it 's a great idea to speak with an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance . There are a number of insurance companies that offer Medigap Plan F and Plan G. Often , the best premiums are with the companies you do not see online . If I can be of assistance with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
There are a number of factors that go into choosing the right life insurance product , including age , health , income needs , and current or expected debt . There is no `` One Size Fits All '' insurance policy , period . The best option for choosing the right life insurance policy for YOU is to sit down with an insurance professional and discuss your specific situation .
There a many questions a consumer should ask when considering their health insurance choices . Some questions will be unique to an individual 's current or anticipated healthcare needs and are difficult to address in this forum . However , in the era of ObamaCare , here are some general questions I think any health insurance buyer should be asking when looking at different health insurance carriers and different health insurance plans . 1 -RRB- Would I qualify for a meaningful subsidy of my health insurance premiums if I purchase health insurance through a Federal or State health insurance marketplace ? 2 -RRB- What is the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum financial exposure I would have under a given policy ? 3 -RRB- Does the policy have copayments for visits to doctors , prescription drugs , urgent care and emergency room visits or are all or some of these commonly used services subject to the policy 's deductible and co-insurance ? 4 -RRB- Are the doctors and hospitals I want to use in-network providers for the health insurance plan I am considering ? 5 -RRB- Are the prescription drugs I am taking covered under the formulary for the health insurance plan I am considering and , if so , what is the level of coverage and will I be subject to step therapy to gain access to a prescription drug I am already using successfully ? 6 -RRB- What coverage , if any , will I have if I choose to go outside of my health plan 's provider network ? 7 -RRB- Are there any geographic service area restrictions to where my coverage applies ? 8 -RRB- Am I required to get a referral froma primary care physician before I can access care from a specialist or receive impatient or outpatient diagnostic services and treatment ? 9 -RRB- How financially stable is the health insurance carrier I am considering ? This is especially important if you are considering enrollment in one of the new Co-Op health plans created under ObamaCare . Obtaining answers to these questions that are satisfactory to you will go a long ways towards assuring that you get the kind of coverage that best suits your needs . Seeking out the guidance of an experienced independent health insurance broker is generally these best way for people to get the answers to these and other questions they might have . Representatives of specific insurance companies can only explain their company 's products to you and , of course , they will think that their company 's plans are the best . The so called , navigators available to help people purchase coverage through the government marketplaces are rarely licensed insurance professionals , have little depth of knowledge in the industry and are generally reading from a script or are providing you generic answers that they have been provided with .
A health insurance exchange is a government-run marketplace where people can buy health insurance plans . One of the big questions everyone asks is whats the difference between buying a health plan on the exchange and off the exchange ? The key difference is the subsidies . You can only get a subsidy if youre buying your coverage on an exchange they can not be used towards plans purchased off the exchange . An advantage of buying a plan off the exchange is you will generally have more choices available for you to choose from . The same plan that is offered on the exchange and off the exchange may have some differences as well . Plans that are on the exchange may have more regulations , therefore requiring they feature additional benefits directly through the plan as opposed to needing a separate stand alone policy to provide the supplemental benefit -LRB- e.g. vision care , dental care , etc. -RRB- off the exchange plans may not be subject to the same standards . Off the exchange plans must still meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- including offering the 10 essential health benefits -RRB- . Its important to remember than not every plan that is offered off the exchanges will be available on the exchanges . Carriers reserve the right not to offer coverage on the exchanges . Thus , some states may have numerous plan selections for consumers where others may have limited choices . Also , not every type of health insurance plan is available on the exchanges short term policies and large group policies are not offered on exchanges at this time . There 's a lot of moving parts to health insurance and given the issues that have occurred with the new healthcare system rollout , it 's highly recommended you work with an experienced health insurance broker to make sure everything is in good order for your program . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A health insurance exchange is a government-run marketplace where people can buy health insurance plans One of the big questions everyone asks is whats the difference between buying a health plan on the exchange and off the exchange ? The key difference is the subsidies . You can only get a subsidy if youre buying your coverage on an exchange they can not be used towards plans purchased off the exchange . An advantage of buying a plan off the exchange is you will generally have more choices available for you to choose from . The same plan that is offered on the exchange and off the exchange may have some differences as well . Plans that are on the exchange may have more regulations , therefore requiring they feature additional benefits directly through the plan as opposed to needing a separate stand alone policy to provide the supplemental benefit -LRB- e.g. vision care , dental care , etc. -RRB- off the exchange plans may not be subject to the same standards . Off the exchange plans must still meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- including offering the 10 essential health benefits -RRB- . Its important to remember than not every plan that is offered off the exchanges will be available on the exchanges . Carriers reserve the right not to offer coverage on the exchanges . Thus , some states may have numerous plan selections for consumers where others may have limited choices . Also , not every type of health insurance plan is available on the exchanges short term policies and large group policies are not offered on exchanges at this time . There 's a lot of moving parts to health insurance and given the issues that have occurred with the new healthcare system rollout , it 's highly recommended you work with an experienced health insurance broker to make sure everything is in good order for your program . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Is A Good Age To Buy Long Term Care Insurance ?
A good age to buy long-term care insurance is when you are in a good financial position and have some extra disposable income . Also , if your health is good , you 'll save thousands of dollars -LRB- potentially -RRB- in premiums . Need specific numbers ? How about between 35-50 ? As an experienced broker , that 's my best estimate . But yes , as I have stated many times , an experienced FULL-TIME broker is a great resource for this information .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Long term care insurance is a morbidity product that is underwritten on the basis on medical and behavioral information . Medical information is based on your gender , age , smoking status , health history and current medical condition . Behavioral information is based on motor vehicle records , vocational and recreational hazards . Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance with the clients around age 50 . But the buying public tends to purchase long term care insurance around age 60 . A couple of considerations here : You want to buy long term care when your healthy an relatively young to afford the premiums . But even if youre healthy , whats the predisposition of your family regarding assisted living and nursing home confinement ? If theres negative health history , then buying long term care earlier may be more prudent .
What age is considered young for long term care insurance ? When you turn age 50 , youll more than likely receive an invitation to join AARP . Most advisers start addressing long term care needs at age 50 as part of their retirement strategy for their clients . But age 60 seems to be the age where long term care becomes a serious consideration . But if your family has a predisposition to disease or a geriatric history of nursing home care , you may not want to wait until age 50 . When youre young and healthy , long term care insurance is relatively inexpensive . If your family fits this profile , you should investigate long term care even if youre age 40 .
Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance with the clients around age 50 . But the buying public tends to purchase long term care insurance around age 60 . A couple of considerations here : You want to buy long term care when your healthy an relatively young to afford the premiums . But even if youre healthy , whats the predisposition of your family regarding assisted living and nursing home confinement ? If theres negative health history , then buying long term care earlier may be more prudent .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
If long term care insurance is purchased and used , it is usually a good buy . When a person buys insurance to cover a risk , and the risk happens , the insurance nearly always was a good purchase . Insurance companies go to great lengths to study statistics and actuarial tables to ensure that there are more than enough people buying policies to offset the claims that will be made . If the long term care insurance policy was not used , then it is not such a good buy . Unfortunately , no one knows that in advance . Getting a policy with a return of premium rider can help make up for the unknown . There are also life insurance policies with living benefits or riders that can be used for long term care type expenses . If the money is not on extended care needs , it is paid out as a death benefit to beneficiaries .
The best time to buy long-term care insurance is anytime you are medically qualified to do so . The biggest problem people have is that they wait too long to apply , they get a condition or chronic health problem that is uninsurable by any carrier , and they are stuck with an LTC-friendly annuity as their only possible solution to how they might pay for long-term care costs . -LRB- This would be an annuity that does not require underwriting for the LTC benefit of the annuity contract , but allows for liberal access to the account value for payment of LTC costs . -RRB- Buying at a very young age does n't not have much of a financial advantage since premiums do n't really start to climb until about ages 50-60 . After age 65 , one has in reality `` missed the train '' and , assuming medical qualification , will pay a hefty price for a traditionally designed long-term care contract . However , there is another train behind the first one , and that involves designing the contract as a static pool of money with maximum access to it . It costs about half of thetraditionally designed LTCi contract , but it lacks any accommodation for the escalation of care costs over time . Still , it is better than no coverage at all . From an economic perspective , in buying young , one would have to weigh the cost of paying premium over a longer period of time . From an insurability perspective , however , one should remember that Superman -LRB- Christopher Reeve -RRB- did not know he would become a quadriplegic at age 41 . Also , many carriers have a `` preferred '' rate class , which may be a lot easier to get at an early application age . Recent claims history research has shown that a greater percentage of claimants are under age 65 and the number is growing . With some possible tax breaks on the payment of LTCi premiums - and possibly greater tax breaks in the future as Congress weighs the burden the uninsured elderly on Medicaid - one should seriously start planning for long-term care individually , as a couple , and for parents as early as possible . Death will happen . How long it takes to die may be problematic and costly .
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
What 's the best age to buy Long Term Care Insurance ? There are many opinions as to the answer for that question , offered by professionals in the insurance field and in by professionals in the field of issues related to aging . As someone who has a background in both fields , I think the best age to purchase Long Term Care Insurance is by age 60 . Rates are lower and you are less likely to have a medical condition to disqualify you than if you wait longer than that . Some cite statistics that over 40 % of Long Term Care is provided to persons under age 65 , so you should purchase LTC coverage at a much younger age . But many of the younger persons in extended care facilities have mental illness or other lifelong conditions that would not have qualified them for LTC insurance in the first place . It is certainly true that the younger you are , the lower the rates , but you do have to offset the extra years for which you will be making those payments . More important than that , I believe , is getting the policy while you still qualify . If you see some health conditions sneaking up on you at age 40 that could be trouble at age 60 , get your Long Term Care coverage while you can .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
You need long term care insurance when : 1 -RRB- You have substantial assets you want to protect , and insufficient income to pay for your own long term care expenses without depleting them ; 2 -RRB- You have enough income to comfortably pay for long term care insurance premiums and want to provide peace of mind for you and your family for your future ; 3 -RRB- You want to live in a specific place to receive your care and may not be able to do so without being able to pay privately -LRB- with the funds that long term care insurance provides -RRB- ; and/or 4 -RRB- You want to hire a relative to live with you to provide your care if you become unable to care for yourself , and probably would not have the money to do so without long term care benefits . The best age for buying long term care insurance , in my opinion , is between 50-60 years old .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Before buying long term care insurance , it is a good idea to look at the area in which you anticipate you will be living when you reach the age where long term care may be needed , and see what their average rates for assisted living and nursing home care run . Talk to your family and get their ideas on arrangements if that type of care was needed . Review your budget and determine how much you have to spend on long term care , and tell that to your agent when you start . An agent can save you a lot of time and frustration from looking at all kinds of bells and whistles that you can not afford , when they know your budget from the start . These are some things that will help your long term care search start off on a good foot .
end question
start question
retirement-plans
How Do I Calculate Retirement Savings ?
If you are asking how do youcalculate how much do you need to save for retirement there is a process to follow . First you need to determine what retirement success looks like to you . Your retirement planner may be trained to help you if not a lifestyle planner could . The next step to figure out what that lifestyle wouldcostand make a retirementbudget . Now you can do somemeaningfulcalculations . Total up what income you expect from any government plans , pensionplans , etc. . Compare this amount to your retirement lifestyle budget . The difference is what needs to be funded byadditionalsavings . There are calculators on the websites of financialinstitutionsto give you an idea . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
How much you need to save for retirement by the time you are 40 depends of course on your desired retirement lifestyle and the amount needed to fund it . Without those details , I unable to offer you an opinion . There are online calculators available of course . However , here is a retirement worksheet to help you understand the process . I have used 6 % for illustration purposes only , it could be higher or lower and is only to give you a point of reference . Age 65 was used as the retirement age -LRB- 25 years in the future -RRB- , Again . this is for information purposes only . 1 . Annual retirement income which must be provided by savings $ _____ 2 . Amount you must save to generate income $ _____ -LRB- line 1 . X 11.55 -RRB- 3 . Amount you have already saved $ _____ 4 . Amount these savings will have grown $ _____ by the time you retire -LRB- line 3 X 4.2919 -RRB- 5 . Amount of savings still needed $ _____ -LRB- line 4 minus line 2 -RRB- 6 . Amount you need to save each year $ _____ -LRB- line 5 X .01720 -RRB- If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
In order to determine how much you need to save for retirement , you first need to define what a successful retirement means to you . The next step is to do a budget to determine what is needed to finance your desired lifestyle . This is a better approach than simply randomly choosing a % of your current income . There are calculators available on many websites to help you determine how much you will need to save to generate a specific retirement income . Given the complexity of retirement planning though , you would be best served working with a financial or retirement planner . There are resources and additional information on Retirement Planning on my website , www.jpw.ca . It includes a Retirement Planning Checklist that will save you time and money . If you have any further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
To start planning for retirement , you should begin to think of how you will generate the income that you have now once you are in retirement . To do this , you simply determine what amount of money will be needed when you retire to generate the income that you now earn . You can then calculate the amount of money you will need to save accumulate this sum of money by the time you wish to retire . There are other quicker rules of thumb like saving 15 % of your income , but you should be careful not to fall into a false sense of security about how well retirement will work out simply by savings a certain amount determined by a broad rule of thumb .
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
If you are asking how do youcalculate how much do you need to save for retirement there is a process to follow . First you need to determine what retirement success looks like to you . Your retirement planner may be trained to help you if not a lifestyle planner could . The next step to figure out what that lifestyle wouldcostand make a retirementbudget . Now you can do somemeaningfulcalculations . Total up what income you expect from any government plans , pensionplans , etc. . Compare this amount to your retirement lifestyle budget . The difference is what needs to be funded byadditionalsavings . There are calculators on the websites of financialinstitutionsto give you an idea . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
There are a number of sites that provide calculators to help you determine how much you need to save each year to accumulate a specific sum of money for retirement . Will you need 70 % of your preretirement income ? More than 70 % . ? The first step is to define what a successful retirement means to you and then set a date . Then you can determine what it wil cost cost to finance your retirement , starting with a budget . Working with a financial or retirement planner would be best , however , a site calculator gives you a the idea . . On my website www.jpw.ca you will find a Retirement Planning Checklist avaialble as a resource . If you have further questions , or fell that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
Regardless of whether you are in you 50 's and are asking how do I start planning or if you are asking how do I plan on retiring when I am in my 50 's the process is the same . First determine what a successful retirement would look like for you . Once you have a basic outline then you can determine what needs to be done to fund it . The next step would be to work with a financial planner to calculate what needs to be done and how your resources should be allocated to make it happen . You will find addition information on retirement planning on my website www.jpw.ca If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
You are not unique . Studies show that less than twenty percent of those without an active plan for retirement feel confident about retiring . Here are four strategies that you can pursue if you are unsure that you can retire on the income you will receive when you retire . The first strategy is to increase your savings for retirement now . As people approach retirement they frequently lose responsibility for children , their mortgage may become paid-off and their disposable income might climb . Seizing this opportunity to increase saving for retirement is crucial . If your employer matches what you put into a retirement or savings program try to make a matching contribution to the company plan . Be careful about putting excessive money into the company plan as the investments contained in the portfolio might now reflect your risk tolerance and you could become quite worried over them . Maximum contributions increase on certain retirement savings programs and you should explore the opportunity that could afford to you . Make sure your retirements savings are coordinated . A retirement income expert could be very helpful in this regard . There are severe penalties if you inadvertently overfund a pension or retirement savings plan . If you are saving all you legally can for retirement you should then focus on reducing debt . The less debt that you carry into retirement the higher your satisfaction will be . At a minimum eliminate any credit card debt and installment purchase debt . Discuss with your accountant the wisdom of reducing or eliminating a mortgage . The second strategy would be to get better performance from your investments . This can be a reason to sit down with someone who specializes in retirement portfolios . You could have investments that have underperformed for a while and have little prospects of rebounding . This might be the time to adjust your assets so that you are better able to reach your retirement goals . The third strategy is often overlooked and yet it is the most obvious . You might be able to work longer . Forty percent of retirees start retirement because of some unforeseen event and at a date that they had not selected . The illness of parents , spouse or children can often force an early retirement . As you approach retirement make an inventory of your marketable skills and interests . Focus your attention on what you want to do and develop the expertise to move into that area whenever retirement starts . If this means staying at your current employer that can be negotiated most of the time . Some people negotiate for reduced hours , or returning to the exact same job as a consultant . If you like your work and you like those you work with , dont think that you must quit because you have reached some arbitrary age . Working longer is the quickest way to enhance your retirement income . My brother could probably work into his 90s because he was a programmer over fifty years and knows some proprietary computer languages that are still being used , but few people can program them . The fourth strategy is to decide to live on less . If this is going to be your strategy , start reducing your standard of living now . Waiting until the day you retire to downsize can bring more trauma than you want . You can live on less now , save the difference . Then when you retire you can keep marching along . This can include moving to a smaller , less difficult to manage single story home . This could mean resuming cooking rather than eating in restaurants . It usually will include reducing the number of cars . For some this will mean establishing a joint residence with a child . While this can be done , planning is essential . Your childs idea might be putting you in the middle bedroom and that might not be desirable . These are practical strategies that anyone can follow to increase the likelihood that your assets will not be exhausted in your retirement and that you can enjoy your retirement . Planning is really the key to having a successful retirement .
That is a great question ! One of the biggest issues we face in the financial industry is the cold truth that many people start thinking about their retirement far too late to adequately fund it . There are few conversations that are harder than having to tell someone that their current income will not allow them to save enough to fund the retirement plans they had dreamed of . Starting early really helps make saving enough a real possibility . By not thinking , `` I 'll start next week/month/year '' the process begins , and allows for enough time to make the possibility a reality . Modern wisdom says to live on your current standard of living , you will need to save 8-10 times that much . If you 're barely making ends meet now , you 're probably going to want to save even more . To be on track to make your retirement goals , the rule of thumb in your twenties is save 15 % of your income . Starting your savings in your thirties increases that to about 22 % . Starting in your 40 's ? Think about setting aside about 27 % . 50 's ? Better plan on nearly 40 % . You can see how increasingly difficult it can be to make up the ground as you age . It is so much easier to start young , and take advantage of time to help build your savings . Having time to build your savings becomes easier when things like employer matching on company 401k 's and compound interest are available to take advantage of . Investing enough in your company plan -LRB- assuming your company is good enough to you to still offer one -RRB- to earn their match doubles your savings , and over time , will make a huge difference . Same with compound interest . Opening an account with compounding interest and depositing in it even if it 's small amounts and infrequently will lead to large values in that account when you are ready for retirement . Many people find that saving the money is hard , studies show nearly 60 % of all American 's do n't have enough savings , and over half of Americans entering retirement age are afraid they will not have enough money to retire on . By having a good , working budget , the willingness to cut back on extra 's , and some dedication , you can avoid being one of them . Please feel free to contact me if you 'd like some help with a budget , or ideas on how to get started saving , okay ? I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I will answer this question as a dad . First , take the advice of one of the richest men in the world , Warren Buffet . His advice Rule 1 `` do n't lose '' . Rule 2 `` refer to rule 1 '' . So cover your ass-etts first , buy yourself some decent insurance . if a calamity befalls you , you will not be financially out of the game . Somebody will suffer the calamity . It may be you . 1 . For free life insurance advice , go to www.lfehappens.org and figure out how much you need now . Then buy it . Today . You are not bulletproof . You likely have a friend your age that has died . No second chance . 2 . Car insurance . Since the average SUV you might hit costs lots more than the minimum coverages , do n't get minimum liability coverage . If you hit someone , and have less coverage than what you hit , you may end up paying for the rest of the SUV you hit out of pocket . While I am on it , buy a car you can afford to lose . Pay cash if you can . Cars are just the cost of getting to work . By paying cash , you can save 4,000 a year or more . A nice little pile . Remember : We fly around all day in 30 year old airliners . Airlines maintain their planes meticulously . Maintain your vehicle and it will last . Fall in love with your spouse and your children , not your car . 3 . Furniture , clothes , and other things do not go up in value . Pay cash for items that do not go up in value . If you ca n't pay cash , you ca n't afford it . Goodwill is open in every city . They always have some nice things . 4 . You do not need cable or Satellite . Netflix is 1/10th the cost . Save 1000.00 a year . 5 . Pack a lunch . You can go on a nice vacation with the 2,500.00 or so you will save over the year by not buying a 10.00 lunch . 6 . Do you really need the latest cell phone and unlimited data plan ? No , I did n't think so . 7 . Little piles make big piles . Only when you have saved something can you plan for retirement . The easiest way to make a good retirement possible is to cover your losses , and spend less . Once you have saved your backside risk and saved some capital , how you allocate your funds is less important than the discipline to do it . What gets watched grows in your life . Keep track of your money , using www.mint.com or some other software , and it will grow . when you have big piles , you will by then have the knowledge of how to keep the money working . Let me say it again . Little piles make big piles . Be disciplined . Do so , and you will be comfortable in retirement . I have faith in you . - dad
There are two popular and entirely different purposes to calculate present value of annuities . 1 -RRB- * Calculating retirement funding needs . Suppose you are planning to retire next month and want to purchase a fixed annuity with guaranteed interest rate of 3 % that will immediately start providing you with $ 25,000 of annual retirement income over the next 25 years . Being able to calculate present value of annuities helps you see the lump sum you will need to pay for your annuity -LRB- in this case , approx $ 435,330 -RRB- . 1 -RRB- * Calculating loan payments . Using the same example in reverse , let 's say you had a $ 435,330 mortgage at 3 % and you wanted to pay it off in 25 years . Purchasing an annuity for that amount would allow you to make payments of $ 25,000 per year for the next 25 years . * Both of these are overly simplistic examples . Talk to a licensed agent versed in annuities for specific annuity details .
Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is addtional information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name along with several others will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community .
Any program where money is being set aside for retirement would be a retirement savings program . These programs address a fundamental concern . In order to have adequate money in retirement you must shift current spending to capital which can be drawn down in retirement in the form of income . The statistics are alarming . Few properly prepare for retirement . The result is that many must retire on a greatly reduced income , continue working , or seek outside help to sustain themselves . The competition is between providing for current needs and wants and forwarding money into the future for spending in retirement . A retirement savings plan helps you do that . Retirement savings plans come in a wide assortment but can be grouped into plans where the employers match a percentage of the contributions made to the plan by an employee to those where the worker pays the entire amount saved . These plans can be divided into two groups , those which are funded with money after taxes and those which are either withdrawn from payroll or are deductible on a personal income tax return . These types of plans are taxed differently when a person retires so a person should carefully consider their options when opening a retirement savings plan .
When you look at retirement planning think of it as 4 phases . 1 . contributions 2 . accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Contribution means how much money will i save each year in my savings vehicle . For example if i have a 401k and i decide i 'm going to contribute $ 5,000 a year that 's my contribution . Accumulation means my $ 5,000 will grow over time in my 401 k savings vehicle.for example $ 5,000 grows in 20 years @ 7 % would add up to $ 219,325 . Distribution is i have saved $ 219,325 in my 401k account , I 'm retired now and i need an income . You decide you want to take out 10 % of 219,325 . Your withdrawal would be $ 21,932 . Now you can have early withdrawals but you have to be aware of which savings vehicle you have because there might be penalties and fees for early withdrawal depending on your age.Some savings vehicles have no penalties . You might want to look at different savings vehicles tha t suite your needs . Transfer is passing your money and assets to your kids , charity , or church when you pass away . Or maybe you have everything put into a trust .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Nevada Have No Fault Auto Insurance ?
We offer a optional coverage on you auto insurance called accident forgiveness . Which will keep your premium from going up if you are found at fault in an accident . If you have any questions about this coverage you can give me a call or e-mail me at kboyle@farmeragent.com .
The State of Nevada 's Department of Business and Industry regulates life insurance in Nevada through the Nevada Division of Insurance . The Nevada Division of Insurance regulates both life insurance insurance agents and life insurance companies that do business in their state . They are based in the state 's capitol , Carson City , NV .
The Nevada department of insurance -LRB- also known as the Nevada Insurance Commissioner 's Office -RRB- regulates insurance in the state of Nevada . In every state the department of insurance or insurance commissioners office regulates insurance in that state .
Yes auto insurance is mandatory in Nevada . The state of Nevada requires that your minimum liability limits be at least $ 15,000 in personal liability with a $ 30,000 cap and at least $ 10,000 in personal property coverage . Based on these minimums , you 'd be well advised to consider purchasing coverage that is higher than these amounts .
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
If you find that the price for life insurance is high in Nevada , it may be because you are older , have a health condition , or are locking in the premium for a long period of time -LRB- such as happens with longer terms or permanent insurance -RRB- . It could also be that you are just hearing one quote and could benefit by shopping more companies . You can do that by visiting a website that offers instant quotes for life insurance in Nevada . There you will find the most competitive rates from a number of companies , for someone your age and health .
Geico ` Government Employees Insurance Company ' underwrites Auto Insurance in all States . When it comes to Property Coverage , Geico has a wholly owned subsidiary that is an insurance agency and they act as an agent to provide quotes with selected insurance carriers who underwrite property risk . Renters Insurance is a very valuable form of protection that usually comes at an inexpensive premium . For those that are concerned about a legal action brought against them for negligence which is very common in the situation of tenants , it is imperative that you purchase the maximum allowed amount of liability insurance ; usually $ 500,000 . Depending on the State . An approximate 80 % of the premium will depend on your declared amount of Personal Contents and required deductible -LRB- we recommend no less than $ 1,000 -RRB- . The deductible does not apply to Personal Liability in most States thus allowing you 100 % defense and coverage -LRB- please refer to your policy for specific details -RRB- . For a Renters Insurance quote in California , Arizona or Nevada . You may use the following link : WEBSITELINK We will be happy to answer any further questions ! Happy Researching !
State Farm does offer Long Term Care Insurance but has recently suspended Long Term Care sales in California , Arizona , Connecticut , Hawaii , Indiana , Nevada and New York . There has not been a formal announcement as to whether they plan to reintroduce products in those states in the future .
State Farm does sell Long Term Care Insurance . Their website describes the Long Term Care and Partnership Long Term Care coverage they offer . As of March ,2013 , State Farm suspended Long Term Care sales in seven states . For the time being , you can not buy a new Long Term Care policy from State Farm in California , Arizona , Nevada , New York , Connecticut , Hawaii and Indiana .
It is not required to havehomeowners insurance in Nevada . It is requiredby mortgage companieswhen you have a loan for the home . There are many reason to have home insurance even if it is not required . Some benefits of having this coverage is that it provides you liability coverage , personal property replacementand addtional living expense . If you have any more questions about home insurance you can give me a call at 702-609-9290 or visit my website to get a quote . WEBSITELINK
Renters Insurance is intended to provide protection for Personal Property -LRB- Contents -RRB- and personal liability protection to those that reside in but do not own the home . The liability section of this policy form carries perhaps 15 % of the overall cost but in our opinion , it carries 85 % of the necessary protection . Especially for those renting in a multi unit building , it is common for negligence claims to arise due to water damage , smoke damage or fire damage to adjacent units or to the building itself . The liability section generally does not have a deductible and gives you first dollar defense up to the policy limits . A tenant could be sued for negligently over filling a bathtub thereby flooding the unit below causing building and contents damage ; there have been cases oftenants falling asleep while smoking thereby causing a fire . The personal property section will cover the tenant 's personal contents against Fire , Smoke Damage , Theft , Water Damage and some other covered perils . It is important to note that there are limitations on the value of Jewelry , Furs , Silverware and other valuables ; for those that have high valued items , a Personal Article Floater would be needed to provide protection . Also , it is important to understand that the peril of Earthquake is not included on a standard policy but may or may not be available by endorsement depending on the insurance company and State . For a free quote in California , Arizona or Nevada , please click the following link : WEBSITELINK
Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ? One must be cautious when proceeding ; the term may be frightening to many ! What will you be missing by finding the ` Cheapest Homeowners Insurance ' ? Will the carrier not include some necessary endorsements rendering the policy useless should you have a related claim ? If you are qualified to compare one policy with another , you may wish to contact 10 companies and obtain a quote . Insurance carriers file their rates based on prior experience specific to each zip code . It is impossible to say which carrier has the cheapest rates without having a specific zip code . If you do n't feel that you are qualified to compare policies , you should contact a qualified brokerage who will have access to multiple companies and will be able to give you exactly what you want . If you are truly looking for the ` cheapest premium ' , we recommend purchasing the best policy and then adjusting the deductible upwards to match the premium you wish to pay . This way , you 'll accept a little risk but be properly insured without taking any short cuts . For assistance in California , Arizona & Nevada ; you may click on : WEBSITELINK For other States , you should search for a brokerage house that does n't charge any fees and places you directly with major carriers ; this is the best way to get access to many companies and only speak with one individual .
Homeowners Insurance is usually associated with the owner of the dwelling ; whereas Renters Insurance is specifically intended for the non-owner occupant of the dwelling . Renters Insurance is intended to provide Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Coverage for the tenant of a home . In a tenant occupied situation , the owner of the dwelling will usually carry Landlords Protection Coverage for the dwelling which does not offer any protection to the tenant . The tenant should purchase his/her own Renters Insurance . This is coverage is very inexpensive and is well worth it ; there have been many instances where a property owner has brought legal action against a tenant for negligence leading to a fire or other type of claim ; the Renters Insurance provides Personal Liability Insurance for the tenant which may provide defense in such an occurrence . For a renters quote in California , Arizona or Nevada , you may click on : WEBSITELINK For all other States , you should find a licensed representative in your State for a quote .
Since Medicare covers people over the age of 65 , and those with certain disabilities that have received Social Security benefits for 25 months , it would be very rare for Medicare to cover a circumcision . It would be possible , if someone with Medicare had a true medical need to be circumcisized later in the life , but very rare , as most circumcisions are done at birth . Given the fact that 40 % of births in American are covered by Medicaid , a better question may be `` Does Medicaid cover circumcisions ? '' That varies by state , as 18 states currently do not cover this procedure , primarily due to the fact that it is most often elective , or not necessary . the 18 states that do n't cover circumcisions , along with the year they stopped : Colorado 2011 South Carolina 2011 Louisiana 2005 Idaho 2005 Minnesota 2005 Maine 2004 Montana 2003 Utah 2003 Florida 2003 Missouri 2002 Arizona 2002 North Carolina 2002 California before 1999 North Dakota before 1999 Oregon before 1999 Mississippi before 1999 Nevada before 1999 Washington before 1999
Due to fact that critical illness is priced based on health and age of the proposed insured and because insurers all seek different degrees of risk , it is not possible to categorically declare on insurer or one plan as being the cheapest within a geographic area like a specific state . You should seek out the assistance of an agent who is licensed in the state of Nevada to compare the prices of numerous critical illness insurance policies .
Yes , homeowners insurance is available online . There are a number of underwriting companies that provide an online questionnaire to reveal the eligibility of the risk . For online quotes and insurance in California , Arizona & Nevada , you may click on : WEBSITELINK For all other States , you may search for a licensed brokerage allowing you access online .
For residents of Arizona , California & Nevada , Onlie Renters Insurance is available at the following link : WEBSITELINK Renters Insurance is a valuable form of protection for not only your Personal Contents but also Personal Liability Insurance which will protect you from a legal action brought against you for negligence ; these claims may occur as a result of a Fire , Smoke Damage or Water Damage claim where the insured is accused of negligence causing the claim and therefore possible damage to the building and/or other units .
Currently in Nevada it is not required for an employer to offer health insurance to its employees . If you are looking at getting health insurance because your employer does not offer it at this time you can visit this site WEBSITELINK to get quotes for health insurance companies here in Nevada .
Basically no fault means just that ! The insurance company pays for its own insured regardless of who may be cited for the accident . Hence the term no-fault , since the insurance company holds neither driver at fault . There are only a few states that have no fault laws in place . Michigan is one , and there are a few others . If you do not live in a no fault state then you can not get no fault auto insurance .
Home insurance is not legally mandatory in any State including California . If a mortgage contract exists against the home , it is likely that the mortgagee requires at least a basic Fire & Lightning policy on the home to protect the collateral security for the mortgage . If on the other hand , there is no mortgage , it would not be adviseable for one to take the risk of fire or personal liability alone . One may purchase a Homeowners Insurance policy with a very high deductible thus generating a comparatively much lower rate in order to have coverage should a major catastrophe occur . Arizona , California & Nevada free quotes are available online at : WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Do I Get Proof Of Renters Insurance ?
If you currently have renters insurance , I would suggest contacting the carrier of the policy or your local agent and request a copy of your policy or a proof of insurance document . Within a couple of weeks at most after signing up for the coverage you should have received your policy documents electronically or in paper form .
If I had to guess on how long it takes to receive a check on a renter 's loss , I would say a good average would be 30 days . Property insurance policies , like a `` Renter 's '' policy usually have an entire section -LRB- that no one reads -RRB- outlining what you as the insured must do following a loss . Generally you have the obligation to notify the insurer promptly and submit a written summary of the items that were lost or damaged , how and when they were acquired , the cost to repair or replace them and their current value.Some claim adjusters may help you in this process , but it is your responsibility and not much happens before it has been completed . Once this `` list '' is prepared AND accepted by the insurer , policies usually state how many days the insurer has to pay you . In practice , however , I would say checks are received within a week or two AFTER your proof of loss is ACCEPTED . I would however expect insurers to question the value certain items , request additional documentation or require proof of purchase on higher valued items . I would also caution insurance consumers to make sure these lists are accurate . Entire claims can be denied because lists -LRB- proofs of loss -RRB- contain information that is questioned and found to be false . Like I had a 52 inch HD TV when it was actually an 18 inch portable you bought at a tag sale . In a serious loss such as a fire or storm loss , insurers often advance partial payments to cover the replacement of necessities or temporary living expenses until the more formal claim process is completed .
A declaration page would show coverage had been purchased , when it had been purchased and when it would expire . However I would not accept a declaration page as proof of Renters Insurance or any insurance for that matter . I would not accept it because there is no guarantee that the Insured or Renter will make the next payment for the policy . If he does n't , the policy would cancel and you wo n't know . If I want proof that coverage is in force , I would request a Certificate of Insurance and I would also request I be named as Certificate Holder . If I 'm named Certificate Holder , the insurance company may -LRB- depends on State Regulations -RRB- be obligated to tell you when coverage is threatened to be canceled . I hope I 've answered your question . If not , feel free to call , fax or email me . Kevin P. Foley , CPA , CPCU PFT&K Insurance Brokers T 877-414-2031 F 877-405-3025 E kpfoley -LSB- at -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com W www -LSB- dot -RSB- kpfoley -LSB- dot -RSB- com
-- > Normal 0 If I had to guess on how long it takes to receive a check on a homeowners policy loss , I would say a good average would be 30 days . Property insurance policies , like a `` Homeowners '' policy usually have an entire section -LRB- that no one reads -RRB- outlining what you must do following a loss . Generally you have the obligation to notify the insurer promptly and submit a written summary of the items that were lost or damaged , how and when they were acquired , the cost to repair or replace them and their current value . Some claim adjusters may help you in this process , but it is your responsibility and not much happens before it has been completed . Once this `` list '' is prepared AND accepted by the insurer , policies usually state how many days the insurer has to pay you . In practice , however , I would say checks are received within a week or two AFTER your proof of loss is ACCEPTED . I would however expect insurers to question the value certain items , request additional documentation or require proof of purchase on higher valued items . I would also caution insurance consumers to make sure these lists are accurate . Entire claims can be denied because lists -LRB- proofs of loss -RRB- contain information that is questioned and found to be false . Like I had a 52-inch HD TV when it was actually an 18-inch portable you bought at a tag sale . In a serious loss such as a fire or storm loss , insurers often advance partial payments to cover the replacement of necessities or temporary living expenses until the more formal claim process is completed . Dont be afraid to request one .
Ill tell you one way they can : by making them the beneficiary on your policy . Its a common mistake , and it can be costly . When men and women go into business for themselves , they often take out a bank loan to jumpstart the enterprise . Many lending institutions require life insurance to be in force on the borrower . They simply do not want to have to chase the heirs or estate custodians in case their client unfortunately dies before the loan is paid up . The question is , how can you arrange for them to get only the amount that is due on the loan at the time of death ? You may take out $ 1 million loan initially , but seven years down the road you may owe only $ 750,000 . How do you prevent them from getting the entire million dollars of benefit ? One very effective way of accomplishing this is through the use of a collateral assignment . As soon as the policy is put into force , the owner signs an agreement signing over the benefit to the lender . But , the agreement is careful to stipulate that only the outstanding amount of the loan would be payable . This is how it would work : the estate of the insured files a claim . The insurance carrier sees from their file that a collateral assignment has been executed . They then contact the lender for proof of the outstanding amount . Once that proof is provided , they are sent a check . The beneficiary gets the rest . The lender gets only what they are due , as they should . But I think you can see the trouble that could be caused if you made the lender the beneficiary . They would get the entire amount of the benefit even if they are not owed that much ! The collateral assignment is a neat little tool that is not complicated and can be executed in a day . But it goes along way towards securing your life insurance benefit for both your creditors and your beneficiaries .
Yes , proof of liability insurance is required when registering a vehicle here in Texas . Here are the specific requirements when registering your vehicle - and the instructions indicate - proof of current liability insurance is required . If you register by mail : registration renewal notices are mailed to all registered vehicle owners . To register by mail , send the following to your county tax office : 1 . Renewal notice -LRB- keep the vehicle owners section for your records -RRB- 2 . Proof of current liability insurance 3 . All fees plus $ 1 mail-in fee In you register in person : take your registration renewal notice and proof of current liability insurance to your county or an approved substation . Please also have : 1 . Your license plate number 2 . Vehicle identification number -LRB- VIN -RRB- or 3 . Registration receipt from the previous year
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
So long as the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the City Ordinances of Boston do not prohibit a landlord from requiring proof of renters insurance from their tenants , then the landlord is free to include such proof as a condition of the lease . I 'd check with a local attorney or consult an official in the City Building Office to see if any such laws or ordinances apply . Regardless of they require it or not , it is always in your best interest to talk to an Insurance Professional and secure that coverage for yourself .
In Connecticut , where I have been licensed since 1985 , if an insurance company needs to have proof of prior continuous insurance coverage , the declaration sheet is the preferred and universally accepted document to certify such proof . In fact , most companies co n't accept just an Insurance ID Card because they are not considered to be as strong a document . If by chance you let your old policy lapse so that there is a gap in coverage , that might be the cause of the problem . There is no reason I can think of in my experience why a valid in force declaration sheet would not be acceptable as proof of prior coverage . You could go to the Insurance Commissioner as previously suggested , but it also may be worth reconsidering your move in the first place .
Showing proof of renter 's insurance is fairly easy . You simply ask for a copy of your declarations page -LRB- often used for car insurance -RRB- , whichstates your coverages , effective date and otherpertinentinformation . It is possible that the owner of the building that you are renting -LRB- or apartment -RRB- willwantto see proof of coverage .
I agree fully with Ted 's answer above . In my lease it actually has a penalty -LRB- $ 30 -RRB- for every month you do not show proof of insurance ! As an agent that deals with many Renters , I urge them to get coverage because I have seen what happens without it . I had a friend lose the stone in their engagement ring 3 weeks after they got it and they had no coverage !
My colleage makes a very good point . In order to lease a car , the dealership will need to receive proof of insurance on the newly leased vehicle in order to complete the transaction . The proof will include both an insurance identification card as well as a binder showing the leaseholder 's interest . Each of those will include the year , make , model and vehicle ideneitfication number of the car so there is no question as to what the insurance is covering . Without such proof , the deal is not going to happen . I happen to represent Nationwide here in Connectivut and our policy includes a provision that any newly aquired vehicles are covered for up to 30 days even if our members do n't for whatever reason , notify us of the aquisition . A similar provision ion your poplicy would probably cover you , but you really neeed to talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy .
An apartment complex may require it 's renters to provide proof that they have Renters ' Insurance coverage as a condition of the lease agreement . This is , of course , to protect their interest in the property and to limit their liability exposure . It is in your best interest to talk to your Insurance Professional about buying Renters ' Insurance regardless of the requirements of any apartment complex or building owner .
You can cancel car insurance at any time . Do not do so until you have another policy in place . Many states require auto insurance with minimum liability requirements . Driving without insurance can cost you your privilege to drive . Many states are starting to spot check you by requiring you send proof of insurance for a specified date , so do not throw away your old proof of insurance right awa .
Simply , any person or family that is renting an apartment or house should have renters insurance . The lease you have to sign as well may require you to have it showing proof upon taking possession of the rental . Now the type of Renters insurance is solely up to you . I always recommend getting replacement value versus current value of your possessions . Contact your agent/broker to discuss the pricing and what exactly will be covered .
In most cases , your car insurance will cover you throughout all 50 states . The real issue is once you move , how soon do you need to register your cars . That may vary by state regulations , but I can tell you that here in Connecticut , once one establishes residency , one has to register their cars within 30 days . In order to register a car here , like in most if not all other states , you are required to show proof of auto insurance issued on a Connecticut policy form . If you have Nationwide car insurance issued in Virginia , that will not be acceptable proof for the CT DMV so you would have to have your insurance transferred and written here before heading over to DMV .
It is going to be important to be in touch with your Insurance Professional because , as my colleague said , in order to purchase the vehicle , the dealership is going to need proof of insurance on that vehicle in order for them to complete the registration of it for you . You or your dealership will need to provide the year , make , model and Vehicle Identification Number -LRB- VIN -RRB- . Further , if you are leasing or financing , the financial institution needs to be named on your policy and proof provided in order to complete your transaction . If you are financing the purchase , the finance company has an interest abd will need to have proof that you have both Comp and Collision coverage . Leasing is similar , however , in addition to the two physical damage coverages I mentiond , they also require that a certain amount of Liabilitry protection be provided by your policy . Here in CT it is common for the requirement to be $ 100,000 / $ 300,000 or more for Bodily Injury and $ 50,000 or more for Property Damage .
That is a good question ! I would certainly expect that your company would have reached out to you , especially if you have a good relationship with your agent . I would also expect that it would be a stock answer for someone calling in to your insurance company -LRB- I 'm assuming that you told them who you use -RRB- to tell them to get an estimate , so they would know how to proceed . I would also expect that your company would have asked them who their insurer was/is . Without a police report , collecting anything may be like pulling teeth , as there is no solid legal proof that the damage was caused by your accident . That said , I would n't expect this to just go away , either . I 'd call your agent , and tell them what happened . ask if a claim had been filed against you , and eplain why you did n't report it . If your damage was negligable , or would cost less than your deductible , they will understand why you did not report it . You want some sort of support if the people who are seeking damages start getting persistant about it , and your agent can be infinitely helpful if that becomes the case . I hope it works out well for you , thank you for asking !
I would like to add my two cents to this : you can get auto insurance the same day you purchase a car . This is assuming that you are qualified to purchase auto insurance -LRB- i.e. you have a valid drivers license and an interest in an automobile -RRB- . Many direct insurance agencies like Progressive and Geico allow you to purchase insurance online and print out the proof of insurance immediately . If you go through your agent they can put in the request and draft the proof of insurance for you at the office .
Generally speaking the penalty is revocation of your driver 's license . This will typically take place if you do not provide the DMV with proof of insurance , typically done with form SR-22 . If you lapse coverage without having additional coverage established the insurer will typically notify the DMV as they are legally required to do . The DMV will then begin revocation if you can not provide proof of insurance .
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
Is Long Term Healthcare Insurance Necessary ?
Any type of insurance involves risk , and a synonym for risk is `` chance '' . There is a chance that you may need long term care services someday . It could be because you had a surgery that requires extensive rehab , you were diagnosed with an illness that requires long term treatment , you got Alzheimer 's or dementia and could not be trusted alone , or you simply lost the strength to care for yourself . Whether or not you need to plan for that contingency probably depends on how drastically that would affect you . If you have very little income and assets , Medicaid will cover you when your assets have been spent down . If you have a very large amount of income and assets , you may be able to pay for the care yourself . It is those in the middle who have the most to consider . For some , long term healthcare will be necessary when they look at the big picture . For others , it wo n't . it is really impossible to answer that question for anyone else .
Any type of insurance involves risk , and a synonym for risk is `` chance '' . There is a chance that you may need long term care services someday . It could be because you had a surgery that requires extensive rehab , you were diagnosed with an illness that requires long term treatment , you got Alzheimer 's or dementia and could not be trusted alone , or you simply lost the strength to care for yourself . Whether or not you need to plan for that contingency probably depends on how drastically that would affect you . If you have very little income and assets , Medicaid will cover you when your assets have been spent down . If you have a very large amount of income and assets , you may be able to pay for the care yourself . It is those in the middle who have the most to consider . For some , long term healthcare will be necessary when they look at the big picture . For others , it wo n't . it is really impossible to answer that question for anyone else .
Skin cancer screenings are not part of the list of covered screenings . If a doctor deemed an exam to diagnose cancer medically necessary , the exam would be covered . Medicare only covers about 80 % of healthcare expenses . You may therefore want to consider adding a Medicare supplement plan to cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . The idea of having a supplement plan to go with your Part A & Part B coverage is that it helps you create a very predictable healthcare expense structure . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your program and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Medicare does not pay for Long Term Care needs such as a nursing home , assisted living or home healthcare . In order to get coverage for this you will need a Long Term Care policy . The cost of nursing homes keeps rising and currently can be $ 7,000 - $ 8,000 per month if you do n't have a Long Term Care plan . A independent agent that specializes in Medicare Supplement plans and Long Term Care plans will be able to save you a lot of time in designing the right Long Term Care plan for your needs .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
Long Term Healthcare Insurance works by either reimbursing the provider of the long term care , or paying the benefit directly to the insured person to pay for their own long term care services . This occurs after the insured person qualifies for the benefit to be paid , by being unable to perform two or more ADL 's and a few other conditions . When the elimination -LRB- waiting -RRB- period has passed , the Long Term Care Insurance benefits kick in .
The current realities that are being faced by insurance companies , doctors , and hospitals are going to unfortunately going to shape the United States healthcare economy for years to come . However when viewing the current trends against the historical forces that have served to mold and evolve the healthcare system I am confident that the free market forces are all persuing courses of action that will slow the current trend of healthcare costs rising at an exponential rate vs. the natural rate of inflation . So in short YES you should expect to see health insurance premiums to continue their current trend over the next several years . There are some finer points relating to healthcare costs and PPACA however I am just giving a brief overview of the industry .
Is long term disability necessary ? Again these kind of questions fall to individual and what they need . Again Disability insurance is income insurance . If your income is not effected by being unable to work -LRB- passive income -RRB- then a Long Term Disability policy may not be necessary . How long could your disability be ? Who knows ? it has n't happened yet . Figuring how long you want coverage to run or what options you want is a risk that you decide . Carrying no risk is really expensive , no doubt about that . Carrying some risk , will cost a few dollars as well . Assuming all risk may work for a person too , but . . if it does n't well this where you read about people losing everything . Insurance is sharing risk with another entity . How much and how long is up to you .
Generally speaking no . Health insurance will not pay for a tummy tuck as it is typically regarded as an elective surgery . However , if you can get a healthcare provider to deem the procedure medically necessary to may be able to get some or all of it covered by health insurance . You may also be able to get other less involved and potentially less costly procedures covered like mini-tummy tuck or Panniculectomy .
If the MRI is medically necessary -LRB- ordered by your doctor -RRB- , then Medicare would cover the examination . Please note , original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- does not cover it at 100 % -LRB- it only covers about 80 % of healthcare expenses -RRB- , you would be responsible for the remaining balance after Medicare pays their share . If you have n't done so already , you can add a Medigap plan to cover all or a portion of the other 20 % . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any further questions . Thanks very much .
No , they are two different solutions to two different problems . Long Term Care Insurance protects you when you get sick and can no longer care for yourself . It helps pay the cost of Nursing Home , Assisted Living , or Home Healthcare . These costs can be devastating to a person and the legacy he or she wants to leave behind . Long Term Disability protects a persons income should that person become disabled for a long period of time . These policies are generally used by working individuals and business owners , whereas Long Term Care is typically utilized by older adults .
What you 're referring to are United Healthcare policies . United Healthcare is contracted with AARP to use their name on many of their products , but United Healthcare is the insurer for the health insurance policies for individuals under 65 as well as programs for individuals 65 and older and on Medicare -LRB- including Medicare supplements -RRB- . If you have any other questions about health insurance or need assistance with your own program , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
That is a great question , and I am certain that you are not the only one wondering ... I think that for all the fuss and bluster made about the ACA -LRB- Affordable Care Act - or `` Obamacare '' -RRB- that both parties realize that there are now roughly 18 million people enrolled in the program , and a good chunk of them would be uninsured without the Act . With every vote coming at a premium -LRB- lol , no pun intended -RRB- that is a number too large to gamble with losing . The Act has not been the budget busting , death camp creating nightmare that was so loudly forecasted , and other than a few disgruntled industries that had to cough up some bloated profits , and folks in some locations that did see premium prices increase , it has actually been fairly well received . The figures show that it has lowered overall healthcare costs substantially , and forced healthcare providers to improve in the quality of provided care and reduce overhead and inefficiencies . Forecasted healthcare costs by the Government 's measures without the Act in place are much higher than they are with the Act , and if Medicaid measures were adopted by those States that chose not to opt in , those costs would be even lower . So any fiscally responsible politician treads a thin line there in choosing publicly to repeal the Act . The fact that the Supreme Court has now twice upheld challenges to the Act also makes the repeal of the Act more problematic than it would have been had the Court struck down one or both of those challenges . When you tack on the generally favorable -LRB- over 80 % -RRB- approval rating the healthcare provided has generated , repealing the Act seems like a very risky idea if one wants to get re-elected . That said , there has been so much political time , money and hot air invested in reviling the Act that it seems unlikely that the ones banging that drum would willingly just abandon it . While it is possible , -LRB- there have been no serious alternatives to the act proposed or presented -RRB- for the plan to be repealed should a Republican Majority and Presidency occur , it is much more likely that any changes to the Act would be directed at what was the true rub for the most vocal opponents - the guaranteed subsidies , and the mandatory enrollment clauses . Since these were the targets of the legal challenges , it seems likely that there would be a belief that the newly acquired majorities would enable the changes to be made legislatively . Re-writing those portions of the Act would bypass for a time -LRB- until the inevitable ensuing legal challenges worked their way to a conclusion -RRB- the upheld judicial provisions . So in summary , repeal is unlikely , but I would look for a renewed assault upon certain provisions . I hope that helps clear up this very muddy water for you , and I thank you for asking !
Medicare is insurance coverage for `` medical care '' and does not cover the costs of assisted living facilities or long-term care facilities -LRB- custodial care -RRB- . Medicare will however cover qualified healthcare costs while a Medicare beneficiary is living at an assisted living facility . Medicare is more often used to pay for a skilled nursing facility or home health care . There are always exceptional circumstances that will allow Medicare to cover different types of care , for example , while in a qualified stay at a skilled nursing facility a Medicare beneficiary may also receive custodial care , but in most cases Medicare wont cover the costs of `` custodial care . '' In some states , Medicaid will pay for some of the costs associated with assisted livingif a qualified beneficiary has a limited income . Medicaid is designed to help seniors and some individuals with disabilities pay for healthcare when they are unable to pay for it themselves . Check on qualification requirements and available waiver programs for assisted living with your state Medicaid department . Individuals should seek out an extended care insurance specialist to understand options and formulate a plan to financially address assisted living or long term care needs before any such care may be needed . Jeffrey J. VanCleve 800-211-0017
Molina Medicare -LRB- Molina Healthcare -RRB- is a company that provides Medicare Advantage plans to persons on Medicare , or are Medicare and Medicaid . They offer healthcare policies in 9 states and work with lower income persons . Molina Healthcare was started by a physician who still serves as head of the company .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can A Quadriplegic Buy Life Insurance ?
This is certainly not my specialty but I am relatively confident that a quadriplegic would be able to find life insurance . There are agencies that specialize in unusual risks and you would be well served to locate one . Peggy Mace is one of the contributors and that is her specialty , I believe .
Great question ! It will be very difficult to find life insurance , but not impossible . Your policy will will have restrictions on how much is paid out in the first few years , and will be a more expensive policy than someone in good health . That said , look for some companies that have Guaranteed issue policies , you will want to shop , as some will be more expensive than others . Kemper , Mutual of Omaha , United Home Life are a few of the companies that carry that kind of policy . If you would like more information , please feel free to contact me . Thanks for asking !
When ambulation and ADL 's are concerned , there are two ways the life insurance companies determine eligibility . One is whether the person can walk and take care of himself without assistance , including a wheelchair . The other is whether the person can walk and take care of himself without assistance of another person . To my knowledge , persons with quadriplegia nearly always rely on another person for at least some of their daily routines . So they would be restricted to guaranteed life insurance , which has a minimum age requirement of 40 + . However , it is good to know the criteria , as some disabled persons can get more coverage , and at a younger age , than guaranteed issue policies offer .
Yes , A Quadriplegic Can Buy Life Insurance ! I would need to know the age however there are guaranteed issue type policies which anyone can get the insurance . You are limited to how much but you can get some , usuallyup to $ 35k . Gerber is such a company if you are over 55 years of age . Other companies may be able to provide coverage however I would also need more information such as the cause of , medications , any other complications .
Yes , A Quadriplegic Can Buy Life Insurance ! I would need to know the age however there are guaranteed issue type policies which anyone can get the insurance . You are limited to how much but you can get some , usuallyup to $ 35k . Gerber is such a company if you are over 55 years of age . Other companies may be able to provide coverage however I would also need more information such as the cause of , medications , any other complications .
The best time to buy long-term care insurance is anytime you are medically qualified to do so . The biggest problem people have is that they wait too long to apply , they get a condition or chronic health problem that is uninsurable by any carrier , and they are stuck with an LTC-friendly annuity as their only possible solution to how they might pay for long-term care costs . -LRB- This would be an annuity that does not require underwriting for the LTC benefit of the annuity contract , but allows for liberal access to the account value for payment of LTC costs . -RRB- Buying at a very young age does n't not have much of a financial advantage since premiums do n't really start to climb until about ages 50-60 . After age 65 , one has in reality `` missed the train '' and , assuming medical qualification , will pay a hefty price for a traditionally designed long-term care contract . However , there is another train behind the first one , and that involves designing the contract as a static pool of money with maximum access to it . It costs about half of thetraditionally designed LTCi contract , but it lacks any accommodation for the escalation of care costs over time . Still , it is better than no coverage at all . From an economic perspective , in buying young , one would have to weigh the cost of paying premium over a longer period of time . From an insurability perspective , however , one should remember that Superman -LRB- Christopher Reeve -RRB- did not know he would become a quadriplegic at age 41 . Also , many carriers have a `` preferred '' rate class , which may be a lot easier to get at an early application age . Recent claims history research has shown that a greater percentage of claimants are under age 65 and the number is growing . With some possible tax breaks on the payment of LTCi premiums - and possibly greater tax breaks in the future as Congress weighs the burden the uninsured elderly on Medicaid - one should seriously start planning for long-term care individually , as a couple , and for parents as early as possible . Death will happen . How long it takes to die may be problematic and costly .
A quadriplegic can get guaranteed issue life insurance , as long as they meet the age guidelines . The age guidelines for most guaranteed issue life insurance is usually a minimum age of 45 or 50 years old , through about 80 years old .
This is certainly not my specialty but I am relatively confident that a quadriplegic would be able to find life insurance . There are agencies that specialize in unusual risks and you would be well served to locate one . Peggy Mace is one of the contributors and that is her specialty , I believe .
There are different schools of thought on how long you need life insurance . Some believe that you only need life insurance until you save up enough so that your dependents would do OK , even if your died prematurely . That philosophy is often called , `` buy Term , invest the rest . '' Those who like this idea tend to buy shorter terms and pay as little as possible for their life insurance , with the hopes that by the time their Term policy ends , they will not need to buy more . Some choose the age of retirement as their cutoff point for owning life insurance , with the intention of having all debts paid off and money for retirement saved up by then . On the opposite side of the fence are those who would use life insurance for a lot of their supplemental income and security in later life , and thus only buy permanent policies . Not only do they spend more on premiums than those who buy Term only , but they may even increase their premiums so that their policies are paid up by the time they retire . Many people fall somewhere in between . They buy what is most cost effective for each particular need . E.g. . They may buy Term for the bigger expenses in their lives , such as getting their kids raised . And they might buy a smaller Whole or Universal Life policy for their final expense needs . Then try to diversify their investments as is prudent at each stage of their lives , and in accordance with the economy , and products offered at that time .
Im going to answer your question this way : Im going to describe for you the kind of person who buys life insurance and is really glad they did . They are happy with the policy they bought ; they are happy with the process they went through to get that policy ; and they are happy to tell all their friends and neighbors about how happy they are with the purchase :-RRB- . These are the qualities of a happy life insurance shopper : Quality number one : the happy life insurance shopper dares to care . Look , life insurance is not for you , right ? Its for your beneficiaries . And frankly , some people could care less about what happens after they die . I mean , to put it bluntly , they are dead , right ? Isnt that what it comes down to ? But for other people , the difference between being alive and being dead is not that great . I mean , you have spent a lifetime building something of value . Your marriage . Your family . Your business . Charitable causes worthy of your support . All these folks have become dependent on you . If you die , they could lose their economic foundation . But if you have insurance on your life , then they dont have to miss a dime . Life can go on in style for your spouse , your children , your business partners , your employees , and all the needy people that are being helped by the charities you support . If you care about these people , then life insurance can make sure life goes on for them , even when your life does not go on for you . Quality number two : the happy life insurance shopper understands that the time to buy is now . Everyone knows we all die sometime . For most of us , though , death is something that happens to someone else - until it strikes home . Maybe someone close to us gets really sick , or we ourselves have a brush with death that wakes us up . But up to that point , we just dont want to think about it . We also convince ourselves that if we stay in shape , eat right , manage our stress , and maintain a good attitude , we can forestall the inevitable . The fact of the matter is that if we really thought about it , there are a whole slew of hazards that are entirely beyond our control . Heres a few that come to mind : Freak household accidents . Violent crime . Natural disasters . Car crashes . Of course we all say that odds are against any of these happening to us . We even say to ourselves that we can afford to wait and buy a policy next year or the year after , so we can qualify for a better rate . But in the meantime , things can happen . And they do . All the time . Unexpectedly . If your time comes before you have a policy in force , then your beneficiaries lose out . You really cant afford to die until that coverage is in place . Quality number three : the happy life insurance shopper wants a guaranteed return on his or her money . OK . Now you know you need to get coverage in force as soon as possible because you never know when your time will come . The next logical question is : for how long do you keep the coverage in force ? Easy answer : for as long as you live . You know at some point you will have your last day on this earth , so that means you know for sure your beneficiary will get their money when your time comes ... ... as long as the policy is still in force . That means you need permanent coverage . The policy should last as long as you do . Doesnt permanent coverage cost more then term coverage ? Yes . Isnt term good for short-term needs ? Yes . Can you buy term and then purchase permanent when you can afford it ? Yes . Does it make sense to buy term now and then convert to a permanent product ? Yes . The thing is , if you dont take a long-term strategy , then you wont be guaranteed a payout . If you do take a long-term strategy , then you will . Guaranteed by a top-flight financial institution . Quality number four : the happy life insurance shopper knows what hes getting into . When you buy a house , do you expect to write a check for the purchase price agreed on ? Of course you do . Same when you buy a business , book a cruise , and buy a pair of shoes . We even demand that a grocery store clerk honors the price on the shelf if an item has been mislabeled . Life insurance should operate the same way . Hard to believe , isnt it ? All too often , a broker will submit an application on the hope and prayer that the applicant will be approved at the rate quoted . We wont know what the price really will be until you are approved . Yes , right , but if you go through full disclosure on a preliminary basis , you can become confident in what that price will be . The broker has to prequalify you and present carriers with thorough and accurate quote information upfront . They can then commit to a price , contingent upon information obtained in underwriting not contradicting the preliminary disclosures . You can then be sure of what you are buying . If you dont get prequalified , then you cant be sure . Simple as that . Quality number five : the happy life insurance shopper wants to be heard . There are a few companies out there who let consumers call them and buy policies . Thats nice for a tiny percentage of the zillions of men and women who need coverage . The rest of us need personalized service and a guide to walk us through the vast marketplace of potential carriers . Only one or two of them will be the best for us , and that broker has to lead the way to their doorstep . But life insurance distribution can be pretty rigid . The broker usually does not have direct access to the carriers . He or she must work through carrier general agencies who act as wholesalers of their products . So there is you , your broker , his or her general agent , and their carrier . I am sure you have played that telephone game where one person in the line passes down a message , and by the time it reaches the end , its completely different . Its the brokers job to make sure all information about you that is passed along the underwriting channels remains consistent and is fairly assessed . He or she is your advocate , and must be prepared to carry your cause over any and all hurdles that pop up in underwriting . And they do pop up . All the time . If you have been properly prequalified for coverage , then the bottom line is this : you should be approved at the rate quoted unless information arises in underwriting that is substantially different from the information that was disclosed on a preliminary basis . Your broker is your advocate to make sure that happens . In my humble opinion , this is how you buy life insurance . If you follow this path , you will be one happy camper :-RRB-
When to buy permanent life insurance ? That is a good question . Some agents recommend buying permanent life insurance for every policy . Some financial consultants recommend never buying permanent life insurance . Both have some valid justifications , but both are rather extreme positions . In real life , with budget limitations , health risks , bear markets , and other considerations , it is hard for me to recommend only one option . Not everyone can afford all the life insurance they need in permanent coverage . Yet buying only term presents the risk of being unable to qualify for a new policy when the current one expires . Putting money in the stock market and savings plans should cover final expense needs , eliminating the need for permanent life insurance . But will those investments and savings be there when you die ? My recommendations are to buy Term insurance for temporary needs , and Permanent insurance for lifelong needs . Specifically , permanent insurance is best for final expense needs such as funeral , burial , paying off credit cards , and other costs associated with putting the deceased to rest . Permanent insurance is recommended if you want to use the policy proceeds to pay estate taxes , pass money to heirs , or bequeath money to a charity . If you use term insurance for any purpose that may find you `` outliving the term '' , you may find that you no longer qualify for a new policy , and that all your plans for your life insurance are moot .
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
Where to buy life insurance if purchased properly should be a guided purchase . Just to buy a policy usually winds up being a mistake in the future or at least when you run into an agent wanting to sell a policy then it becomes like the used car problem . Yours is wrong ! Persons who just buy life insurance in today 's life without any kind of knowledge or counseling is kind of following the idea that they know it all and need no knowledgeable assistance . The best solution to purchasing life insurance is to find a knowledgeable agent who can , through in depth research of your total financial needs , guide you and tell you the why 's of certain policies . There is no one policy that is better than all others for everyone . If you have an insurance agent that is really interested in you and your situation that individual will spend time with you without pushing for a quick sale . The real desire of that agent must be to be a mutually beneficial part of your life and the agent . The agent will educate you on the possibilities and the reason for different types of policies . Then , with your help , find something that will fit into your financial plan . You should have a total financial plan that you are working toward , consisting of a proper budget , proper life insurance , -LRB- and other insurance -RRB- , proper investments and investments that are balanced for long range safety and fit your own desires . Buying life insurance properly is far more complicated than buying a policy . Many just buy a policy and then blame someone else for the failure of that policy to do the job it was purchased for . Allen D. Mitchell , Ph.D. , CLU , FLMI Author , second edition `` The Prophets Dollar ''
Nope . Life insurance can not be an investment . Think about this question for a second . What is the most essential element in an investment ? It is time . Some investments need time to mature . Other investments need time to increase in value . Example : if you are invested in the stock market , and your investment decreases in value , what should you do ? Should you sell ? Of course not . You would sustain the loss only if you redeem the shares at a lower price than when you bought them . What you should do is let them ride , and if properly managed , they should recoup their value , and then some . Over time . If you die , then you could pass this investment on to a family member , and that person could continue to manage the fund . It could continue to grow in value . Over time , during his or her lifetime . Does life insurance buy you this kind of time ? Absolutely not . The product is designed in just the opposite way . It assumes you will run out of time tomorrow . You get the biggest bang for the buck when a death benefit is paid immediately . Somebody could conceivably buy a policy today , pay one monthly premium , and then die . The beneficiary would receive the entire survivor benefit . Would you call something an investment if it required no time to realize value ? Nope . Or that is guaranteed to pay out , for that matter ? Lets talk about that guarantee for a second . Of all the forms of insurance you might buy , the only one you know for sure will pay a benefit is life insurance . This is because you know for sure you are going to die . You could buy medical insurance , but never get sick . You could buy disability insurance , but never get hurt . You could buy auto insurance , but never have a car accident . You could buy professional liability insurance , but never get sued . You could buy home insurance , but never have a fire . And on and on . However , if you hold on to that life insurance policy , you know your survivors will get paid . For sure . So , life insurance is a uniquely wonderful risk management tool that requires no time at all to realize value , and is absolutely guaranteed . With these characteristics , it meets nobodys definition of an investment . Now : I am sure you know that certain life insurance products can produce cash value . Whole life , universal life . Even term can carry a return of premium feature . But these funds are not to be considered investments . They should be seen as added value . As ways to partially offset your cost . As an extra benefit . They make the purchase of a policy extra attractive . But you should never assume that they will have time to grow . They will disappear as soon as a claim is filed and a benefit paid . And that could be tomorrow .
Yes , more than likely you can , just like you can buy many insurance products on line . There are certainly arguments to be made for buying insurance that way and many major companies are including a `` direct line '' purchase option along with the more traditional distribution of products through a local licensed agency force . I know I myself am a licensed Professional Insurance adviser so I am biased , but it seems to me that we need to focus on what exactly we are buying when we make an insurance purchase . Sure , a policy is a document and a price is charged for what it represents , but i am convinced that most of us buy these things expecting that we 'll never have to use them , Hence the natural inclination to buy the cheapest . My opinion is that there are reasons to start your search on line , but talk to your local Insurance Professional for sound advice before buying anything .
Why should you buy life insurance ? Maybe you should n't . If no one depends on you for income , if you will have no final expenses to bury or cremate you , if you do n't care about the person that might be stuck paying off your debt , then , do n't buy life insurance . Also , people that do not believe in insurance should n't buy it . In spite of the fact that owning an insurance policy is not a religious commitment , buying it might disrupt their value system and enrich an already wealthy insurance agent or insurance company . On the other hand , if you do care about anything other than yourself at all , you should consider buying it . Even a small face amount of life insurance is better than having none . It might provide you with some peace of mind as the gurney you are bleeding to death on is being rolled into the surgical unit .
If you are considering term insurance please ask yourself these questions . How old am I ? If I buy 20 year term now how old will I be when I have to buy another policy ? Does it meet your needs to buy term life considering the objective of the policy ? The purpose of term has always been to allow the purchaser to invest the difference between the cost of term life and permanent coverage . How much are you `` investing '' now ? Every policy you have means you are paying `` administrative costs '' for that policy . What if you have one good size permanent policy purchased at your current age to meet all your life insurance needs or can you buy a term life and then be able to meet your financial objectives and not have to buy another life insurance policy ? Finally , you need to have a personal advisor that puts your needs first and has the integrity to make recommendations based on your TOTAL financial plan and not some life insurance agent pedaling life insurance
Dave Ramsey sells a financial plan where you only need term life insurance . He recommends 10 to 20-times your annual salary . He likes for you to buy it through his agency -LRB- Zander -RRB- and they will sell over the phone nationwide . The reason his plan only needs term is because if you follow his plan you will be wealthy at the end of the 20 or 30 year term and will no longer require life insurance . The mistake people make is if they only do bits and pieces of the plan they will end up in bad shape when their term runs out . They will end up older , NOT wealth and completely uninsured . Some of the things his plan requires for the average person to be successful are : 1 . Take on 2nd and 3rd jobs to pay down all debt . Get Gazelle intense on paying off ALL debts -LRB- other then your mortgage -RRB- quickly . Pizza delivery is a favorite for Dave . 2 . Sell any cars with large loans -LRB- over $ 3,000 -RRB- on them . Even if you owe more money than the car is worth . Buy `` beater '' cars for cash . Do n't pay more than $ 1,500 for your beater car if you have debts . 3 . If your house payment is more than 1/3 of your net income , sell it too . Rent or buy a cheaper house . 4 . Always buy low cost term life insurance at least 10 times your annual salary . Also always buy disability insurance . Do NOT buy Long Term Care Insurance until you are age 60 and then DO buy it . 5 . Do NOT take vacations , go to the mall , eat out in restaurants , etc. untill ALL debt is paid in full other than your mortgage . Eat beans and rice and then rice and beans . Buy clothes at rummage sales and 2nd hand stores . Patch the kids clothes . During this phase you wo n't see the inside of a restaurant unless you 're working there . 5 . Once your debts are paid off , focus on paying off your mortgage as soon as you can . You can lighten up a little now and go to a movie once a month or something to reward yourself . 6 . After the mortgage is paid in full , you can now start socking money away and build your net worth . Dave recommends your company 401K up to the amount that they match . Any amount you can invest beyond that you put in growth stock mutual funds . He likes you to do this through his `` Endorsed '' local provider in your area . He tells you to expect an AVERAGE of 12 % + annual returns on your investments with his endorsed providers . 7 . After you have saved up a lot of money and have zero debt ... you have made it . Now you can live like no one else . Your term life insurance is no longer necessary because you have piles of cash . You are self insured . This is a brief outline of Dave Ramsey 's plans to explain why he believes no one needs whole-life insurance . To get more information listen to his daily radio show and read his many books . I have no connection to Dave Ramsey and I am not one of his providers . I personally do not believe his plan works for most people because they will not do what it takes to become wealthy and debt-free . It is very easy to shoot holes in his investment and insurance advice -LRB- in my opinion -RRB- but he is a great motivator to pay down debts and live within your means . In my opinion , both term and whole-life insurance have their correct and incorrect uses . In Dave 's opinion , only term makes sense .
Right Peggy !! The `` death benefit '' inside a disability policy is usually limited to a few months worth of the `` Monthly Benefit '' . So if your benefit is $ 3,000 a month , then you might get 3 , 6 , maybe 9 thousand in a death benefit . LOOK AT THE LANGUAGE . Does it pay ONLY AFTER you have met an elimination period or is it an immediate benefit ? Disability is a very important plan to own . Yet , I know that buying life insurance , buying disability , buying long term care , buying critical illness , & then buying home , auto , umbrella , & more can be very overwhelming ... . You might consider buying a Living benefits & / or Hybrid Life insurance plan ... These are life insurance plans that you can use BEFORE you die . I have a massage therapist that owns a plan with a death benefit , a $ 30,000 critical illness benefit , and has a $ 1000 a month disability benefit . She pays about $ 43 month for all of this . PERFECT for single mom with a modest income . YES ... standalone Disability has more features and better terms ... yet the all in one plan allows her to cover a critical illness , a disability , & early death . Reach out with questions :--RRB- - gravy
How much disbility insurance should you buy ? A combination of the most you can get and what you can afford . If you already have group insurance in place , usually you can only buy up to 70 % of yourwagescombined between individual and group . If group is not in place you can buy individual coverage up to 70 % and combine with group later to actually insure more than 100 % of your income . The hard part with how much coverage should you buy is how much will it cost ? Getting the full level of coverage can be pretty hefty as far as premium goes .
end question
start question
home-insurance
When Does Homeowners Insurance Pay For A New Roof ?
For the most part , when your roof is substantially damaged as a result of a covered peril , it may be possible that the cost to replace that roof may be covered under your policy , subject to your deductible of course . To gain a better understanding of the specific terms and conditions of your policy , it is always best to talk to your Insurance Professional .
Keep in mind that your homeowners policy is not a maintenance policy . Similar to your auto insurance not providing coverage for new tires or new brakes , your homeowners insurance policy will not pay for a new roof if the roof is worn out and has just deteriorated over time . The life of a typical composition shingle roof is anywhere from 20 - 30 years and needs to be replaced if it is falling apart due to wear and tear . This is very different from a claim scenario where your roof sustains sudden and accidental damage from a storm -LRB- i.e. wind or hail -RRB- . If this is the case , your roof can be covered under your homeowners insurance and depending on the extent of the damage could potentially be covered for replacement . Everyone should consult their agent to check the language of the policy and weigh all options because when you submit a claim it is normal for your rates to go up because of a loss of discount and / or a rating surcharge . -- @MooneyInsurance
A homeowners policy covers damage caused by a covered peril . The loss to a roof is covered when it is the result of a fire , for example . It is not covered if it is the result of age and deterioration as those arent covered perils . When a roof is adjusted for a damage loss , many companies treat a roof on a cash value basis . This is because the life of the roof is shorter than the life of the remainder of the building . So if a roof is half way through its life and suffers a covered loss , it is likely to be covered to 50 % of the cost of replacing the roof .
A homeowners policy covers damages caused by a named peril -LRB- i.e. fire . -RRB- Deterioration is rarely covered under a homeowners policy . The roof is a piece of the residence that is treated differently when it comes to a claim . Most companies do not replace a roof ; rather they pay for the actual cash value of the roof , or the depreciated value . If the roofing is the problem and it is not the result of a storm or something breaking it , then coverage isnt likely .
There are two parts to this question . Your homeowners policy will cover damage caused by a roof leak if it is the result of a named peril . You should read your policy or consult with your agent to determine if there is coverage . Frequently there is . The second part is the roof itself . If the roof leaked as a result of a named peril it could be a valid claim , however , many insurance companies do not replace a roof , rather they pay the actual cash value of the roof . That is the depreciated value of the roof .
A roof has a shorter life span than the rest of the house . As a result many insurance companies do not provide replacement coverage for a roof . Instead they determine the life of the roof and repair the roof under the policy using the cash value of the roof . If a $ 15000 roof has $ 5000 of damage and is midway through its life , you could expect a settlement that would help repair your roof but would not replace the roof .
homeowner 's insurance will pay for a new roof if the damage is a result of a covered claim . For example , if a tornado causes damage to the point where your roof needs replacing , it will be covered . If a few shingles are damaged and they can be replaced instead of an entire roof , that will also be covered .
Many insurers include amendments to the standard form . The standard form might include damage from windstorm . Your policy might be a replacement policy . The amendment that you might find in the rear of the policy changes that . It probably says that the company will only use actual cash value to settle a loss involving the surface of the roof . This is actually reasonable as roofs do not last as long as the rest of the house . A 20 year roof could have damage after 10 years and the company depreciates the roof and will make an adjustment that makes you whole . It wont pay for a new roof in most circumstances .
Homeowners insurance will cover water damage from a roof leak if the roof sustained damage from a recent storm and the damage to the roof resulted in damage inside the home . If the roof has issues that have gone unrepaired , water damage in this circumstance would not be covered . The roof damage and the water damage must have occured at the same time . Keith Prim - Dallas , TX 214-435-0791
Your homeowners will repair or replace your roof if damage is the result of a specified peril -LRB- i.e. fire . -RRB- Most companies limit recovery on a roof claim to the actual cash value of the roof . That means that the recovery can not exceed the depreciated value of the roof . This is because roof life is much shorter than the rest of the house .
The difference between replacement cost and fair value coverage can be significant . If a home with a roof 15 years old suffers hail damage , fair value coverage would only pay 25 % of the cost of a new roof assuming a 20-year roof life . Replacement cost would pay the full cost of replacing roof . This applies to both the home and all its contents . Carefully consider the difference in premium between replacement cost and fair value coverage .
Repair to a roof can be covered if the damage was caused by a covered claim such as wind or hail . However , if the roof is old and needs repair due to the fact that it is just getting old , it will not be covered under your homeowner 's insurance . And it may be time to get a new roof !
Unless the roof was excluded from your originalhomeownerspolicy which is rare . -LRB- Possiblyfrom poor conditions when the insurance policy was first obtained -RRB- . A roof is covered for certain perils of a homeowners policy . If you carry special form you would be covered for Fire , wind , hail , falling objects , smoke , vandalism . The roof would not be covered for normal wear and tear which is the responsibility of the homeowner to maintain and upkeep . Specific details of a potential loss should be discussed with your agent as they would befamiliarwith your policy and specificcoverage 's .
A homeowners policy covers damage from severe weather . It does not pay for weathering . Many insurance companies adjust claims for the roof differently than from the rest of the building . Even if the loss to a roof is the result of a storm , the company will normally adjust the claim on a depreciated value . This is because roofs have a limited life span .
Yes . Generally homeowners insurance will cover the water damage from a leaky roof . If your carpet or personal property is damaged it should be covered under your policy as long as the roof leak came about unexpectedly . However , homeowners insurance will not cover the cost to repair the roof .
Unless your homeowners policy has a specific exclusion for you roof . It would be be covered in the event of a covered loss less your deductible . It is rare for the roof of a home not to be covered by a homeowners policy but if the roof is a poor condition then the carrier may choose to exclude coverage for it .
Yes and no ! The typical multi-peril homeowners policy water covers damage caused by rain under specific circumstances such as water windblown thru the roof shingles or a hole in the wall or roof caused by lightning . However if it rains to the degree that water collects on the ground and enter your home thru doors or windows , the homeowners policy does not cover it . That would require a flood insurance policy . If it rains and your sump pump fails and water fills your basement , most homeowners policies will NOT cover the loss , though many companies offers optional sump pump failure coverage . Consult your insurance professional for the details that apply in your state .
Shingles is an awful disease and often adults will get Shingles later in life . The recovery time is longer than you expect and it is certainly a disease to avoid if possible . About half of the population gets Shingles before they turn 80 . Homeowner 's insurance , of course , does not pay for it . However , if you are referring to shingles on your roof ... yes , if part of an approved claim , they are covered ! Obviously , if your roof is damaged in a tornado , you may need new shingles . Not the disease though .
Homeowners insurance typically does cover your roof , whether comprised of common asphalt shingles or another material . However , policies may differ in HOW your roof is covered . Some policies cover the roof for actual cash value -LRB- market value - depreciation = actual cash value -RRB- . While others have a guaranteed amount of coverage . Most people do not know that their deductible may be higher for wind orhail damage claims -LRB- the most common perilswhich lead to an insurance claim on a roof -RRB- . Policies typically have an option of a flat deductible , meaningthe same deductible is paid regardless of the type of claim . As an example let 's say you have a flat $ 500 deductible . Whether there is afire claim or wind damage claim , you pay $ 500 for your deductible . Many policies have the option , and some even require , a higher deductible for wind/hail claims.For example , you may have a $ 1,000 deductible for wind/hail and $ 500 deductible AOP -LRB- all other perils -RRB- . Want to know what coverage you have ? Check out your policy or ask your agent today !
Although property coverage under the homeowners form is extremely broad there are special limits to losses of certain types of property and losses under certain conditions . This is particularly true when the property is unusual . There is a special limit of coverage on sports memorabilia and collectors cards . The company will reduce the amount it will pay on this type of loss to a specified amount , usually $ 2500 . One of the problems is establishing the value of these types of items . Another problem is that the items are susceptible to theft and so coverage is routinely denied if the sports memorabilia is in transit or shipped by regular mail . That restriction is waived if they are shipped by registered mail . The company will probably not cover the loss of sports memorabilia if it is located in an unattended vehicle . Finally they will usually limit the loss of a single item . Although a homeowners policy usually provides replacement coverage for the structure of the home it is frequently subject to a special limit for the roof . This special limit affects the homeowners recovery at the time of loss to the actual cash value of the roof if it is more than a given age such as ten years . Water damage is often understood to be flood damage but there are types of water damage that can occur inside the home that are also excluded or have special limits . The first point to make is that a homeowner might think that wind-blown water is covered because wind damage is covered . This is specifically excluded in most policies . Also excluded is water or sewage which backs up through sewers or drains . Another water exclusion is water which comes from below the surface of the ground and this damage is often seen in sidewalks , driveways , foundations and swimming pools . A final point is that other materials that are carried along by water are also excluded . There are special limits that govern recovery of water damage losses if the homeowner doesnt take prompt steps to stop the damage , or waits a long time to initiate repairs . Many companies have special limit that affect certain breeds of animals . These limits apply to personal injury particularly . Specified breeds that are frequently excluded are pit bulls , Doberman pinschers , and Rottweilers . However , if the homeowner has an animal with a history of biting , losses arising from the actions of that animal can also be excluded . Regardless of breed many insurers have a special limit on the losses that they will pay for personal injury , frequently $ 25,000 per occurrence . Under some circumstances the insurance companies will allow you to purchase coverage for the items that have been excluded . A good example is the water damage caused by water from outside the plumbing system which backs up through sewers or drains . There is rarely covered if the damage is the result of negligence . My father-in-law removed a toilet . The subsequent flooding was not covered . The most frequently purchased special limit coverage is jewelry coverage . This is a complicated subject but it allows coverage for items that are more valuable than the basic homeowners policy will cover . The same sort of coverage is available for weapons , furs and other high value items which are subject to special limits .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Why Buy Medicare Supplemental Insurance ?
Medicare is not meant to cover all charges and if you rely on Medicare alone you can have a lot of out of pocket expenses . Medicare has large deductibles and copay 's for hospital stays . There are annual deductibles for outpatient and doctor visits . Without a supplement you could owe thousands .
Assuming you have both Medicare Part A and Part B -LRB- together this is known as `` original Medicare '' -RRB- , these two parts pay for approximately 80 % of diagnostic procedures . If you do not have a Medicare Supplement plan , then you may be responsible for the other 20 % of the expense -LRB- if the doctor does not take `` assignment '' -LRB- meaning the doctor accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If you had a Medicare Supplement plan , the 20 % of expenses you would normally be responsible for may be fully covered , depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you have . There area 11 different Medicare Supplement plans available in the marketplace - plans F and G being the most comprehensive . Please note , if you do have a Medicare Supplement plan , when you visited the endoscopy center , both the Medicare ID card and Medicare Supplement ID card should have been presented to the receptionist -LRB- or whomever handles billing at the facility -RRB- so the facility could bill Medicare and then the insurance company for the difference -LRB- if you had a Medicare Supplement plan that was not a plan F , you may be responsible for an extra amount -LRB- to an extent - again , depending upon the plan letter you have -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me if you have any other questions or would like to consider securing a Medicare Supplement plan . Even if you have a Medicare Supplement plan , a lower rate may be available to you without affecting the existing benefits or you may be able to improve upon what you have - Medicare Supplement plans are standardized so the coverage is the same for a given plan letter , regardless of the insurance company the coverage is through .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
The cost of a medicare supplement plan is determined by several factors : your age , your zip code , the plan you want -LRB- e.g. plan f , plan n , etc. -RRB- , and whether you use tobacco products . Rates will vary by insurance company and not every company offers every plan . If you 're being medically underwritten , you may be assigned level 2 rates instead of the standard rate/level 1 if you have certain medical conditions . Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare -LRB- meaning no networks ! -RRB- . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . I would recommend consulting with an experienced Medicare supplement broker to determine which supplement plan is most suitable to your needs and your budget . Please feel free to contact me for help . Thanks very much .
Humana Choice PPO would be a Medicare Advantage plan . When you are on Medicare and have a Medicare Advantage plan , coverage falls under the benefits described in your Medicare Advantage plan . It does not get billed to Medicare first and then to the Medicare Advantage plan carrier -LRB- in this case Humana -RRB- or vice versa . It would only be billed through Humana - the carrier pays their portion and you would be responsible for the portion dictacted by the plan benefits -LRB- e.g. you may be responsible for a deductible and then a coinsurance/copayment amount , etc. -RRB- . Medicare Advantage plans are senior health insurance plans that work similarly to the under 65 health plans -LRB- deductibles , copays , coinsurances , max out of pocket expenses , networks , etc. -RRB- . In short , the gov ' t pays the carrier x number of dollars for each enrollee under the plan and the carrier takes the risk of expenses . So when you have a claim , the claim gets processed through the carrier rather than directly to Medicare . Medicare Supplement plans -LRB- also known as Medigap plans -RRB- operate as a supplement -LRB- key work there - supplement -RRB- to original Medicare -LRB- your Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . When you have Medicare and a Medicare Supplement plan , the physician -LRB- or hospital or other facility -RRB- bills Medicare and then bills the carrier for their portion of charges - depending on which plan letter you have , you may be responsible for a small portion or nothing at all . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan is to create a predictable expense structure for your healthcare needs rather than taking on a larger portion of risk of expenses on claims . Plus , the Medicare Supplement plan structure allows you to go to any doctor that takes Medicare , meaning no networks and they are not restricted to annual enrollment periods like Medicare Advantage plans are . If you want to take a look at a Medicare Supplement plan to see how it compares , I can help you with that . The Medicare Advantage Disenrollment Period -LRB- MADP -RRB- is from January 1 - February 14 of each year so you have an option to change if you decide to do so . Please note , depending on several factors , you may or may not be subject to medical underwriting for a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- e.g. whether you are new to Medicare , this is your first time in a Medicare Advantage plan , whether you have a guaranteed-issue right , etc. - I can help determine this -RRB- . My contact information is cited on my agent profile - you can access it by clicking on the `` contact me '' button . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions I can assist with . Thanks very much .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
To supplement Medicare it 's best to have a Medicare Supplement Plan . These are standardized plans in most states . The highest level of coverage is the Plan F Medicare Supplement . It pays 100 % of the co-pays and deductibles for Medicare covered treatments . The others to consider are Plan G which is the same as Plan F except you pay your Medicare Part B deductible which is less than $ 150 per year currently . You will often save $ 200 to $ 300 annually on your premiums choosing a plan G supplement over a Plan F . You can also consider the Medicare Plan N Supplement for an even lower premium but you will take on more doctor co-pays and a few less benefits . There is a high deductible version of Plan F where you have a much lower premium but you pay the first $ 2,070 in expenses each year but are covered 100 % for costs above that . Medicare and your supplement do not cover prescription medicines so most people buy a Medicare Part D plan for those . None of these plans cover dental or eye doctors so some people buy additional coverage for those . All companies sell the exact same standardized Medicare Supplement Plans so it is the easiest type of insurance to shop and compare and lower your cost . A Plan F with one company may be as much as $ 500 per year cheaper with a different company and the coverage is exactly the same . It 's best to use an insurance broker who sells for many companies rather than sign up directly through one specific company . When there is a rate increase -LRB- they ALL have them -RRB- your broker can just re-shop the plans for you and help you get back to a lower premium .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
AARP Medicare Supplement Plans are insured by United Healthcare . United Healthcare pays a royalty fee to AARP to have them sponsor their Medicare Supplement plans and that is why you must be a member of AARP in order to apply for one of their Supplements . AARP sponsors the plan they are not providing the insurance coverage or paying the claims . After the Medicare Supplement has been issued and in benefit you do do have to renew your AARP membership if you choose not to in order to keep your Supplement .
If you are looking for a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap -RRB- , there are a few ways to find a Plan . When looking for a Medicare Supplement policy , an independent insurance agent will be able to shop the market and show you what is available in your area . Independent agents are not employed by insurance companies . This means they contract with many insurance companies allowing them to find the lowest premiums available . Their flexibility also means they can help you locate an insurance company based on a health condition as well . You can contact the insurance carrier directly in some cases . While this may seem convenient , it is often more expensive and you wo n't have an agent to help you with annual rate reviews . Captive agents work for one insurance company and can only offer Medicare Supplement insurance products from that company . Premiums can vary . What 's important to note is that you do n't have any choices because the captive agent ca n't shop the Medicare insurance market for you . Researching on the internet is an option , but can be time consuming . Also keep in mind that most insurance companies do not make their premiums available to the public and will only work with a licensed insurance agent . If you are considering a Medicare Supplement Policy -LRB- Medigap Plan -RRB- , you 'll want to make sure whoever you choose to work with will take the time to find out what plan will work well for you . Most people choose Plan F because it covers all Medicare approved bills and they do n't have to worry about deductibles , co-pays , co-insurance or excess charges . Lately , Plan G has been popular because it works just like Plan F after meeting the annual Part B deductible of $ 147 -LRB- 2014 -RRB- . Plan G 's premium is often lower than Plan F , making it more affordable for some . These are not the only Medigap Plans ... there are eight other Plans to choose from ... that is why it is wise to speak to an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . Thank you for taking the time to read my reply . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of further assistance .
David has given you a fine explanation of the mechanics of cash accumulation inside life insurance . I will address an additional point . One big reason for why life insurance has cash value is because that cash makes more people want to buy the product . When you think about it , life insurance really is not for the insured - it is for the beneficiaries of the insured . These include their families , their businesses , and their favorite charities . For many people , it is considered a necessary evil . They certainly want to do right by all these folks they support , but really - who wants to buy something that pays off when you die ? I think that from a marketing point of view , cash value sweetens the pot . It makes the product much more appealing . Now people can have their cake and eat it too . They can purchase a policy with a survivor benefit for their heirs . That policy can also have a cash account that is available to them while they are alive . They can use the money to supplement retirement ; buy a house ; fund a business ; and for emergencies Not only that : the cash receives very favorable tax treatment . You might ask , why does the government give such favorable tax treatment to life insurance ? One big reason is that there is no way on earth that federal and state governments could take care of all the people that benefit from life insurance . It simply could not collect enough money to pay all the windows , widowers , children , businesses , and charities for whom people buy policies . It is entirely in the governments interest for people to buy tons and tons of life insurance . And over time , people have . The life insurance industry has poured trillions of dollars into the economy so that people can remain self-reliant - and off of government subsidies . The side benefit of a cash account helps make that happen .
The best time to buy Medigap -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- right when you activate your Medicare Part B insurance . When you start Part B , it opens a 6-month initial open enrollment period to apply for any Medigap plan with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . If you do n't secure a Medigap plan during this period and later you decide you want one , you will be subject to medical underwriting unless you qualify for a guaranteed issue right . So why get one?Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only cover about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't sound like a very big figure , it can add up to a nice big medical bill really fast . For example , if you had a procedure done that cost $ 10,000 and Medicare paid for 80 % -LRB- $ 8,000 -RRB- , you would be responsible for the other $ 2,000 of the bill - how many people can just get out their checkbook and write a check for that amount ? That number can be a lot higher too . The idea of a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- commonly referred to as a Medigap Plan -RRB- is to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . A plan F is the most comprehensive Medicare supplement plan available in the marketplace today - plans C , G , and N are very competitive as well .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous.Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plansA , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium .
Great question . I ca n't really give a number to say is the average cost of a Medicare Supplement Plan F because the price of a policy depends on several factors - your age , your gender , your zip code , and whether you use tobacco products . Each carrier also charges a different rate even though the coverage is exactly the same for Medicare Supplement Plan F -LRB- Medicare Supplement plans are standardized -RRB- . Typically you can figure the price range to be somewhere around $ 120 - $ 150 per month for the lowest cost option in a given zip code if you 're a male in your 60 's - a female in her 60 's may be in the range of $ 80 - $ 120 per month . Someone in their 70s or 80s is probably going to be in the neighborhood of $ 200 + per month . An example regarding the zip code aspect , a 65 year old male in the Washington DC area -LRB- let 's assume zip code 20016 -RRB- would be $ 127 per month with United Healthcare - a 65 year old male in Houston , Texas -LRB- let 's assume zip code 77071 -RRB- would be $ 149 per month with United Healthcare . An example regarding my note about the carriers charging different rates for the same exact Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- using the 20016 zip code again -RRB- - United Healthcare charges $ 127 per month for a 65 year old male whereas Mutual of Omaha charges $ 194 per month for the exact same plan for the 65 year old male -LRB- no differences between the two carriers ' Medicare Supplement plan benefits -RRB- . Some areas United Healthcare may be cheaper than Mutual of Omaha in and vice versa in other areas as well as other insurance companies . There are multiple options to choose from and you ideally want to secure the coverage with the lowest possible cost . Why pay more with one company than another for the same exact policy and benefits ? To determine what the costs are you 're looking at for yourself specifically , I would need to know your age , gender , zip code , and whether you use any tobacco products - I would then be able to generate the quotes for you accordingly . I would also consider looking at the rates for a Medicare Supplement plan G. It 's exactly the same plan as plan F , but does n't cover the Medicare Part B deductible which is only $ 147 in 2015 . So if the difference in premiums is $ 20 - $ 30 + per month , plan G can offer you substantial savings . Think `` how much extra are you spending to protect against a risk of $ 147 ? '' If the difference in premiums is $ 30 per month between the lowest cost option for plan F and the lowest cost option for plan G , that would mean you would be spending $ 360 per year to protect against a risk of $ 147 . In that example , plan G would be more cost advantageous to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to give me a call or send me an e-mail by clicking on the contact me button to discuss your coverage options in further detail and to go over any other questions you may have . Thanks very much .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap Plan N is one of the 10 standardized Medicare Supplement plans . Medigap Plan N covers 100 % of the following : Medicare Part A Coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up . Medicare Part B Coinsurance -LRB- except for a co-pay of up to $ 20 for some office visits and up to $ 50 co-pay for an emergency room visit -- waived if admitted -RRB- . Blood -LRB- first 3 pints -RRB- Part A Hospice Care Coinsurance or Co-pay Skilled Nursing Facility Care Coinsurance Medicare Part A deductible Foreign Travel Emergency -LRB- Up to Plan Limits -RRB- Medigap Plan N DOES NOT cover the following : Medicare Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- Medicare Part B Excess Charges -LRB- if the amount a provider is legally permitted to charge is higher than the Medicare approved amount , the difference is the excess charge -RRB- . Medigap Plan N is used by many Medicare Beneficiaries , but it does fall short in not covering Excess Charges . It is important to be aware of how Excess Charges can be charged to you by a provider who does not accept assignment . You may wonder why anyone would bother with Plan N if they have to worry about Excess Charges . The premium for Plan N is often the reason why people choose it .
Are you referring to a Medicare Supplement plan -LRB- also known as a Medigap plan -RRB- , a Medicare Advantage plan , or a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan ? Your original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- is provided by the federal government . You can apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan anytime during the year . You can be subject to medical underwriting -LRB- answering yes/no health questions , a phone interview with the carrier , and a prescription check -RRB- if you 're outside your initial enrollment period -LRB- when you were new to Medicare Part B -RRB- and do not have a guarantee-issue right available to you . Medical underwriting for Medicare Supplement plans can be done in less than a week . There are no exams for these products . Please note , a common concern I hear a lot from individuals looking to replace their Medicare Supplement plans is they 're worried they 're at risk of losing the existing one if they apply for a new one and get declined . This is NOT true ! Even if you apply for a new Medicare Supplement plan and get declined , you can always keep the existing plan because Medicare Supplement plans are guaranteed renewable . If you 're looking to change your prescription drug plan provider or your Medicare Advantage plan provider , you can only make a change during certain times of the year . For the most part , you can only make changes during the annual enrollment period each year -LRB- between October 15 - December 7 -RRB- with changes becoming effective January 1 . Outside of this enrollment period , you can only make changes under certain situations -LRB- known as special enrollment periods -RRB- . An example of this is if you moved outside of the plan 's service area . For a full list of situations that qualify you for special enrollment periods to make changes , please visit the Medicare.gov website . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Is A Plan Administrator For Health Insurance ?
Plan administrators are often used with an employer group health insurance plan , especially if the plan is self funded . In a self funded plan a trust is established to hold and manage employer and employee contributions to the loss fund . The administrator is responsible for reviewing and adjudicating claims and paying the ones that are approved .
What factors to consider when creating a retirement plan ? COST . Different plans have different costs associated with the operation of a plan . Administrative cost and fees can be greater than the cost of matching for some small business plans . A business owner has to look at a variety of options in plan design to keep the administrative costs low and money spent towards providinga plan , goes towards the employees the employer actually wants to reward . Most companies have set aside funds to provide for administrative costs and matching for their retirement plans . The thing is the higher your administration costs , the less money an employer has to give to the employees of the business . There are many plan choices out there to choose from . I would suggest finding a plan that allows you to reward the people who work for you , not so much for the people that bill you -LRB- plan administrators -RRB- .
A qualified beneficiary must notify the plan administrator of a qualifying event within 60 days after divorce or legal separation or a child 's ceasing to be covered as a dependent under plan rules . Plan participants and beneficiaries generally must be sent an election notice not later than 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred . The individual then has 60 days to decide whether to elect COBRA continuation coverage . The person has 45 days after electing coverage to pay the initial premium . Qualified beneficiaries must be given an election period during which each qualified beneficiary may choose whether to elect COBRA coverage . Each qualified beneficiary may independently elect COBRA coverage . A covered employee or the covered employee 's spouse may elect COBRA coverage on behalf of all other qualified beneficiaries . A parent or legal guardian may elect on behalf of a minor child . Qualified beneficiaries must be given at least 60 days for the election . This period is measured from the later of the coverage loss date or the date the COBRA election notice is provided by the employer or plan administrator . The election notice must be provided in person or by first class mail within 14 days after the plan administrator receives notice that a qualifying event has occurred .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
In simple terms , a COBRA health insurance is a short-term continuation of the exact same group health plan you had with your employer prior to termination from that job . So , if you liked the coverage provided by the plan prior to termination , you will still like the coverage provided by the plan under COBRA administration because it is the same plan . What you may not like is the cost under COBRA administration . Many people incorrectly assume that COBRA rates are excessively higher than the rates you paid while employed . This is incorrect . By law , your insurance rates under COBRA can not exceed 102 % of the rate you were paying before termination . So , why does the COBRA premium seem so much higher than the premium prior to termination ? The answer is your employer 's contribution to your health insurance . While you were employed , your employer was definitely paying a portion of yours , the employee 's , health insurance premium . If you worked for a `` benefits rich '' employer , they may have been paying all your premium and even contributing some to your dependents ' coverage . Under COBRA , the employer no longer is responsible to contribute anything to your health insurance premium . You are therefore responsible for 100 % of your portion of the premium as well as that of your dependents . That is why the COBRA cost is more than you were seeing while employed . So , the real question then becomes is it cheaper for me to continue with my current group health plan under COBRA , or is there a better alternative in the personal health insurance marketplace . The only way to answer that question is to solicit quotes from personal health insurers .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
The Retirement Plan Administrator typically is responsible for administering all aspects of the plan for the plan sponsor -LRB- normally a company sponsoring the plan -RRB- . Some of the duties include providing summary of the plan to participants , selecting investments for the plan , enrolling plan entrants in a timely manner . Most plan administrators will contract with a third party to help with all the responsibilities , including filing Form 5500 -LRB- like a tax return for retirement plans -RRB- and often the testing required by the government to make sure the plan is not discriminating higher income employees over the lower income employees .
ASO means Administrative Services Only . A number of small and large companies partially self insure or self insure for their health insurance paying all claims up to a specfic dollar amount for each employee . They purchase stop loss insurance to cover large claims above a that specific dollar amount . ASO means that the insurance carrier is only providing administrative services and providing a PPO network for the company that is self-insuring . If your employer is self insured they are using a carrier or Third Part Administrator -LRB- TPA -RRB- to handle those services which is why it is ASO .
Plan administrators are often used with an employer group health insurance plan , especially if the plan is self funded . In a self funded plan a trust is established to hold and manage employer and employee contributions to the loss fund . The administrator is responsible for reviewing and adjudicating claims and paying the ones that are approved .
If you are on your parents ' health insurance plan you can stay on that plan until you turn 26 under the Affordable Care Act . Prior to turning 26 you will receive notification from your health plan that you will be terminated when you turn 26 . When you turn 26 you will have three options : If your parent 's plan is an employer sponsored group plan you will be offered COBRA . This would be the same plan you currently have with an administrative fee attached of 2 % if the employer has more than 20 employees and up to 10 % if the employer has under20 employees . If you are on an indivdual/family plan you will be offered a choice of plans from your exisitng health insurance plan . Your third choice is to find your own health insurance plan with the carriers offering individual plans in your state .
Many employer sponsored retirement plan engage the use of a bank , investment house or other qualified plan administrator . Qualified plans must be filed with the DOL -LRB- Dept of Labor -RRB- and IRS and approved before they can be implemented . It is more economical to use a pre-filed and approved plan document such is available through a master trust used by your plan administrator .
That is a great question ! There are some reasons why taking a loan out of your 401k might not be the best option . Before doing so , please consult your plan administrator and be certain to understand the rules for your particular plan . The first reason is that you may lose the ability to contribute to your fund while your loan is outstanding . Some companies will disallow contributions or matches until the loan is repaid . That can seriously derail your long term growth potential of your plan . Other companies will deduct the loan payments from your check , reducing your flexibility with other payments . The second reason is that you lose your tax sheltered advantage . The interest that you are paying yourself on the loan -LRB- you are both borrower and lender in the transaction -RRB- is considered a taxable income by the IRS , and reduces your returns . It 's also possible that the opportunity cost of having invested that repaid interest could be more than what you 'd make having used it in an investment . The third reason is that if you were to God forbid lose your job , the loan amount is repayable within 60 days . If that is n't done , you are subject to a 10 % penalty on the balance , -LRB- if you 're under 591/2 -RRB- and are due for whatever State and Federal taxes apply , as it is no longer considered a loan , but an early withdrawal . An alternative to consider might be a home equity line of credit , if the interest rates and your equity allow . Some things to consider . Again , I 'd advise you to speak with your plan administrator and see exactly what your plan rules are . Thanks for asking !
The Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC -RRB- section 401 -LRB- k -RRB- allows companies to establish plans for their employees . The code governs the taxation of the plan . The actual administration of the plan is left to the employer . An employer sets the requirements for participation . If you are an employee you can check with your plan administrator to determine if you are eligible .
A defined contribution pension plan established by an employer under section 401 -LRB- k -RRB- of the Internal Revenue Code is what is popular called a , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- The program itself is designed for the employer . Administration of the plan may be handled directly by the employer or by a third-party administrator . The fiduciary requirements are with the employer ; however , these may be contracted to another party as well .
CMS -LRB- Center for Medicare Services -RRB- , a division of HHS -LRB- Health and Human Services -RRB- is responsible for overseeing the administration of Medicare plans . Claim services for original Medicare are handled by insurance carriers and third party administrators . If you have an Advantage plan , all your benefits are handled by a private insurance carrier that sub-contracts with Medicare -LRB- CMS -RRB- .
Vanguard does administer 401k plans . Vanguard can handle everything from helping a small start-up company get a plan up and running to working with a mega plan . For small to mid-size companies , Vanguard uses the record expertise of Ascensus , a leading record keeper and administrator of retirement plans . If you already have a Third Party Administrator , Vanguard can work with them as well .
If your parent is age 65 or older , they qualify for Medicare so you can not typically add them onto your healthcare coverage at that point . Depending on the particular health plan you are enrolled in , you may or may not be able to add your parent onto that plan . Check the summary page in your health plan and see what it says or you can check with your health plan administrator to confirm whether they allow parents as dependents on your family plan . If your health plan allows this , here are other qualifications you will have to meet with the IRS . You must already be claiming your parent as a dependent on your federal tax filing . The IRS dependent qualifications include : Your parent is under age 65 , makes under $ 3650 per year gross income , you provide more than half of your parents ' support for the year .
There are important reasons why you would be interested in having a Roth IRA . Participation is restricted by income which results in many people who really need the benefits of a Roth IRA being unable to open an account . You probably appreciate that the Roth IRA pays benefits after age 59.5 that can be received income tax free . Other qualified plans tax the entire distribution as current income . Unlike a traditional IRA , 403 -LRB- b -RRB- , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and other plans there arent any mandatory distributions at age 70.5 . These mandatory distributions are fully taxable as ordinary income . The Roth IRA also provides tax benefits that would pass to beneficiaries should you die prior to exhausting your Roth IRA . If you decide to use the funds in the IRA for educational expenses , for a child or yourself , there isnt the 10 % penalty tax assessed as there is in the case of the traditional IRA . You can use the funds for helping in the event of a disability , or use the money for a first-time home purchase , without penalty or tax if the plan has been in effect for more than five years . An easy way to invest in a Roth IRA is to open a regular IRA and when you are done making contributions , convert it to a Roth IRA . You would be taxed on the value of the traditional IRA as though it were current income , however , with some planning you could probably arrange for that to have the same impact that you would have experienced with making the Roth IRA contributions currently . If you have an employer sponsored plan you should contact the plan administrator and tell them that you want a Roth option for their plan . This is not unusual in 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- plans . The money could be invested in a Roth 403 -LRB- b -RRB- for example and receive the same treatment as the Roth IRA . The contribution limits would be much higher . The employer might consider this plan particularly advantageous to the more highly compensated employees , but it is a great benefit for all employees . The Third Party Administrator for your employers sponsored plan probably has the language already prepared to institute a Roth option . The fact that so few plans offer a Roth option is due to poor communications . This should be an option that your employer would favor . Your senior people will love the option . It would be a great benefit for all the employees . A permanent life insurance policy has many of the same characteristics of the Roth IRA . Much like the Roth IRA the premiums are paid with after tax dollars . There isnt any current tax deduction for the deposit . In the same way the life insurance policy and Roth IRA provide for a tax deferred -LRB- and ultimately tax-free -RRB- accumulation of cash inside the policy . With the life insurance policy there isnt any restriction on borrowing the money from the cash value . The careful use of loans can result in recovering the cash value without paying income tax . Universal life insurance policies and variable life insurance policies have the ability to accumulate significant amounts of money in this way . Unlike the Roth IRA there arent any income restrictions to participating in a life insurance policy . There isnt a restriction on the amount that you put into the plan . Contributions are at your discretion . Of course the life insurance policy is also self-completing should you die before reaching withdrawing benefits . The variable life insurance policies also afford a person with the option of selecting a mix of security based solutions that will rise and fall with the market . Again , this is similar to some of the investment characteristics found in Roth IRA vehicles .
The company providing the Roth IRA should be able to support you fully in the process of rolling a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- . Make sure that you understand the tax implications . It is preferable to allow the company that is going to end up with the funds to initiate the roll-over . There are many problems if you start with your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan administrator as they are required to inform the IRS of any withdrawal from the plan . It is better if the proceeds pass from the current plan administrator to the company providing the Roth IRA
Qualifying for Medicare , in general , is a pretty simple and straight-forward process - the most common way people qualify is by turning age 65 . You can complete the application process as early as age 64 and 9 months . Many individuals will qualify for premium-free Part A - you have the option of signing up for Part B as well , however , Part B requires a monthly premium . If you 're under 65 , you may be eligible for Medicare if you 're on disability -LRB- and have been for at least 24 months -RRB- or have end-stage renal disease -LRB- ESRD -RRB- . You can enroll in Medicare Part A -LRB- and Part B as well -RRB- online through the social security administration website , ssa.gov , or at your local social security administration office . Part A & Part B are referred to as Original Medicare . Original Medicare covers approximately 80 % of expenses and both parts feature a deductible that you 're resopnsible for paying -LRB- in addition to the other 20 % of remaining expenses -RRB- . I would recommend adding a Medicare supplement -LRB- Medigap -RRB- plan to cover the other expenses - these are sold through private insurance companies . Plan F is the most comprehensive , but if your doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , you may want to look at a plan N as well . The major advantage of adding a Medigap plan when you sign up for Medicare Part B is that you have a 6-month open enrollment period where you ca n't be turned down for a plan -LRB- no medical underwriting -RRB- and it helps create a predictable expense structure for your health care . You may also want to look into adding a Medicare Part D prescription drug plan as well if you would like to have your coverage for prescriptions as well .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is A Psychologist Covered By Health Insurance ?
The short answer to this question is `` some times . '' Psychology is usually is covered by most health insurance plans , but not always . It is also important to note that most insurance policies will have a limit on the number of visits that are covered each year , and that not all psychologists accept all health insurance policies . Before seeking care from a psychologist , you should make sure they accept your personal health insurance policy , and also contact your insurance provider or consult your policy to find out if there are any limits on the number of visits covered each calendar year . Some companies may also require you to see your primary care doctor in order to receive a referral to see a psychologist . If you do not yet have health coverage , I would encourage you to consult an independent licensed , certified health insurance agent that can review your situation and make a recommendation on which policy would be best for you based on your personal needs .
The short answer to this question is `` some times . '' Psychology is usually is covered by most health insurance plans , but not always . It is also important to note that most insurance policies will have a limit on the number of visits that are covered each year , and that not all psychologists accept all health insurance policies . Before seeking care from a psychologist , you should make sure they accept your personal health insurance policy , and also contact your insurance provider or consult your policy to find out if there are any limits on the number of visits covered each calendar year . Some companies may also require you to see your primary care doctor in order to receive a referral to see a psychologist . If you do not yet have health coverage , I would encourage you to consult an independent licensed , certified health insurance agent that can review your situation and make a recommendation on which policy would be best for you based on your personal needs .
Medicare does not have rebates . Are you asking how much Medicare pays a psychologist ? Or are you asking how much your co-pay is if you go to a psychologist ? If you are on original Medicare you can go to a psychologist . If you have a Medigap plan it will pay all co-pays .
Medicare has limited mental health coverage . Medicare Part A covers inpatient care , while Part B covers outpatient care . Care provided by psychologists , psychiatrists , social workers and other qualified mental health practitioners are included . Individual and family therapy is included , as is psychological testing , counseling , medication management and some prescription drugs .
I think what you mean to ask is will health insurance cover the services provided by a psychiatrist and the answer is maybe but most likely yes . You should contact your insurer 's customer service department to get further clarification on this . You should also be very specific when it comes to discussing the type of care you are seeking . Psychiatrists mostly deal in medication management and do not often engage in psycho therapy . If you are looking for that service , you are usually looking for services from a psychologist or counselor .
No , Medicare does not pay for LPC 's , or Licensed Professional Counselors , at this point in time . Legislation has been proposed to include payment for LPC 's under Medicare part B . As of now , only Licensed Clinical Social Workers , PhD Psychologists , and Psychiatrists are able to be reimbursed by Medicare for persons needing counseling .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
A private health insurance exchange is a private sector counterpart to the Federal Government run or state run health insurance exchanges created as a centerpiece of ObamaCare . A private health insurance exchange or marketplace as is now the preferred term , is generally going to be an employer based program that offers multiple health insurance plan options to its employees . There are variations on the private health insurance marketplace theme . Some are built around the offering of individual health insurance plans from one or a number of different health insurance carriers . Others are built around one group insurance carrier that offers a variety of different plan designs at varying price points for employees to choose from . Still some others are large enough that more than one group health insurance carrier is electing to participate and offer a selection of health insurance plans , so in this last example you could have plans from Humana , United Healthcare and CIGNA all being offered alongside each other thus giving employees an even broader selection of plan designs and perhaps provider networks to choose from . In some cases there can be integration between a private exchanges and the government based exchanges . This is most commonly found in private exchanges built around offering individual health insurance plans . This can then allow for employees who would qualify for subsidies through the government health insurance exchanges to enroll in those plans while employees who do not qualify for subsidies can enroll in health insurance plans offered outside of the government exchanges . Another advantage that private exchanges can have over their government based counterparts is that they can offer a wide array of other employee or individual insurance options such as dental , vision , life , disability , critical illness , cancer and accident insurance . Some private exchanges can even extend the one stop shopping concept to auto , homeowners and other property & casualty based insurance products.The government health marketplaces are currently limited to health insurance and some dental insurance options . If you are interested in learning about whether a private health insurance exchange might be the right solution for your employee benefit needs please feel free to contact me .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
Health insurance itself does not make anyone healthier or sicker . Removing or reducing the financial barriers to accessing healthcare that health insurance makes possible helps create an environment where preventive care is encouraged and health problems may be detected at earlier more manageable stages . Past statistics showed a correlation between having health insurance and better health . However , those statistics come from the era when underwriting of health insurance for risk was allowed and individuals could be declined for coverage for pre-existing conditions . Starting in 2014 such practices are no longer allowed in the fully insured health insurance marketplaces and so a totally different risk pool is being created and we are essentially working on the assumption that expanding access to care will correlate with improved health care outcomes . As health care reform is easing access for some segments of our population that may have been on the outside looking in in the past , it is also raising premium costs and out-of-pocket expenses to levels that are either forcing some previously insured persons out of insurance coverage or significantly raising the out-of-pocket expenses they must incur before their coverage kicks in which may deter some people from seeking needed treatment . For this reason the jury will be out for some time as to whether our current health insurance reform efforts will yield improved health for the general population . A person can have the best health insurance possible but if the individual does not take responsibility for managing their health -LRB- smoking cessation , weight management , exercise , etc. -RRB- their overall health status is unlikely to improve .
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Universal health insurance can also be referred to as single payor health insurance and is a term used to denote a health insurance system that covers all citizens of a nation . Generally the concept of a Universal Health Insurance system is used in reference to the government run or managed systems such as are found in Canada and many European countries . While there are variations on the theme from country to country the objective , as the name implies , it to provide health insurance coverage to every citizen of the country regardless of their income or health status . Usually Universal Health Insurance systems are funded by taxes paid by the nation 's citizens and businesses . The concept of Universal Health Insurance sounds appealing to many and is becoming part of the ongoing debate in the United States about how to finance our citizen 's health care needs . In theory everyone would have comprehensive health insurance coverage with the cost spread out amongst every citizen and with lower overhead costs as a single , government run agency administers the health insurance system . In practical terms , the real world results of such systems have fallen short of perfection and have their own sets of problems and sources of dissatisfaction just as we experience with our current mixture of private and public based health insurance systems here in the United States .
Health insurance rates increase because the underlying cost of health care services increases every year and our population 's average consumption of health care services has been increasing for many years . If the cost of gasoline steadily rises and at the same time you are driving more miles each year then you understand it costs you more to operate your car . Health care services are the gasoline and using more health care per person is the increased miles driven part of the analogy above . That addresses the basic economic factors that have been happening for decades . Now add to those the impacts of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and you have a whole new set of cost drivers being added to the equation . For example , ObamaCare does add taxes and fees to insurance plan costs and medical devices - these costs are passed on to the consumer . The law mandates that a wide range of preventive health care services must be covered at 100 % , all policies must cover maternity -LRB- many individual policies did n't -RRB- , no medical underwriting is allowed , polices must be guaranteed to be issued and pre-existing conditions must be covered immediately , and these are just some highpoints of the coverage changes now required . While all of these requirements may sound good , and they do benefit many people , there is no way around the fact that such changes will increase health care consumption even further . More demand for a finite resource equals higher costs . An aging American population is also a driver of increased health care consumption and , with the Baby Boom generation entering their retirement years , will be for years to come . This gives you a generaloutline of why your health insurance rates have been increasing and will continue to be increasing for the foreseeable future . As I described above , our nation has many structural issues that drive health insurance rates higher . Despite its name , the Affordable Care Act serves mainly to expand access to health insurance and health care but does very little to address any of the underlying factors that lead to higher health insurance rates .
If your employer pays 100 % of the employee cost of their group health insurance plan -LRB- very rare these days -RRB- then you will be enrolled in your employer 's health plan . That does n't mean you have to use it or that you could n't be covered as a dependent on your spouse 's health plan . If an employee contribution is required under your employer 's plan -LRB- extremely common these days -RRB- then you are free to `` waive participation '' -LRB- i.e. - elect not to be covered -RRB- in your employer 's plan and can be covered under your spouse 's plan . Generally , unless there is a significant benefit difference involved between the two plans , -LRB- and I 'm assuming it 's just you and your spouse and there are no children involved -RRB- it would probably be less expensive for each of you to be covered as Employee Only under your respective employer 's health plans . Another important note is that one of the quirks of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that spouses were n't defined as dependents -LRB- no reason has ever been given for this -RRB- . This has led a few employers to not offer coverage to spouses at all , but this is still very rare . What is becoming increasingly common though is an employer policy that penalizes spouses who elect to be covered under their spouse 's employer 's plan when that spouse has health insurance available at their place of employment . Usually a higher monthly premium payment is assessed for such a spouse as opposed to a spouse who does not have other health insurance available . You 'll want to make sure your spouse 's employer does n't have such a personnel policy in place before you opt to be covered under your spouse 's health plan .
While I might agree with these answers , medical payments coverage is often purchased with the intent to cover medical expenses incurred in an accident involving an automobile not covered by a person 's health insurance coverage -LRB- deductibles , co-payments , dental expenses , cosmetic surgery , etc -RRB- . However many health insurers -LRB- including Medicare -RRB- have amended the co-ordination of benefits feature in their medical insurance plans to require an injured subscriber to exhaust their medical payments coverage before they can make a claim under their health insurance coverage . In effect , anyone buying -LRB- and paying for -RRB- medical payments coverage may not be able to collect on it should they ever need it ! Their health insurer may have already exhausted the limit . Before considering this coverage , an insured should check with their health insurer and make sure they can use the benefit to cover expenses not covered by their basic health insurance plan first . Once they have been fully reimbursed , only then can the health insurer become entitled to these benefits .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
Health Insurance is a Privilege ; it is a privilege to have #healthinsurance which is a benefit in many ways . If an insurance company insures a person in return for a premium paid , the insured person now has the benefit of lower health costs due to agreed upon health tariffs negotiated between the insurance carriers and health providers , in addition , the insured person will only be responsible for a portion of the now lower fees for health services received . In areas of socialized health care , the Government or Employers may be paying the premiums for the same benefits explained above . The outcome is always better when everyone is insured since it lowers the overall ` risk ' taken by the insurance companies ; with better health care , comes better health , lower risk , lower premium and a greater public awareness of the ability to promote better health care options . For more information regarding Health Insurance , you may visit : WEBSITELINK
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Much Life Insurance Does A Single Person Need ?
Great question ! The answer depends on a number of factors . Does the single person have dependents ? What is the goal for the life insurance ? That may sound like a silly question , but Life Insurance can be a whole lot more than insurance against dying too soon . Whole Life insurance can provide a good source of tax-free retirement income . It can be used for college funding . It can be used as a personal bank / credit union where you can use tax-free money at very low interest to buy things . Talk with a knowledgeable Insurance Adviser who can help you determine the amount of insurance you need .
The need for life insurance is as unique as the person purchasing the life insurance . There are several life insurance calculators online to assist you . However , the basic rule of thumb is to carry enough life insurance to pay off all of your debt for your loved ones plus ten times your income so they can invest the proceeds and replace your income .
In order to determine how much life insurance coverage to get , single persons should start by thinking about what others would need to pay off for them . Life insurance is a fast and easy way to settle bills , and it is especially helpful for survivors to have these ready funds when there is not a spouse to take care of the estate . The bills might be credit card debt , a school loan , utilities until the home is sold , etc. . Next , how much do you want to leave for your funeral or memorial service ? You can pick out cemetery plot , casket , urn , and so many things ahead of time , then have life insurance to pay for it all . What is remaining after expenses can go to the beneficiary ; you do n't have to leave it all to the funeral home . Finally , do you want to leave any funds to special people in your life or to a charity ? Life insurance is a good way to make a small amount of money stretch into a big gift . You may have other things this prompted you to think of , that could be covered by a life insurance policy . But these three - debts , final expenses and gifts - are the main ones that I can see being well served by having a life insurance policy as a single person .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
A single person may need life insurance for many different reasons . The single person may have debts that they want paid off if something happens to them or they may have other financial obligations that they want covered . If anyone financially depends on a single person , then life insurance would help in that situation . A single person may also need life insurance for estate planning , business purposes like keyman insurance , buy sell agreement , or an executive bonus plan . Life insurance is also a great way to leverage assets for charitable giving . This is a high level overview of possible reasons . It would be helpful to discuss your unique situation with an insurance professional .
Single premium life insurance is life insurance that is paid with one payment . Term life insurance can not be paid with a single premium . Single premium life insurance must be a type of Universal Life or Whole Life policy . Often , single premium life insurance is purchased on the basis of how much face amount can be purchased with the lump amount of cash that the applicant has available . Other times , the applicant has a face amount in mind and pays whatever lump sum is needed to purchase that amount .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
Insurance covers losses . When a single person dies someone will be responsible for the financial cost of a funeral . A single person can view insurance as a way to ensure that whoever covers the funeral will have ample resources to do it . Single people can also use insurance to add to their personal savings portfolio . They can use products like Universal life which has a savings feature and still offer a death benefit to those who will handle funeral arrangements . A single person should talk to an agent and get some quotes on the various types of insurance available to them and see if it meets their needs .
In order to determine how much life insurance coverage to get , single persons should start by thinking about what others would need to pay off for them . Life insurance is a fast and easy way to settle bills , and it is especially helpful for survivors to have these ready funds when there is not a spouse to take care of the estate . The bills might be credit card debt , a school loan , utilities until the home is sold , etc. . Next , how much do you want to leave for your funeral or memorial service ? You can pick out cemetery plot , casket , urn , and so many things ahead of time , then have life insurance to pay for it all . What is remaining after expenses can go to the beneficiary ; you do n't have to leave it all to the funeral home . Finally , do you want to leave any funds to special people in your life or to a charity ? Life insurance is a good way to make a small amount of money stretch into a big gift . You may have other things this prompted you to think of , that could be covered by a life insurance policy . But these three - debts , final expenses and gifts - are the main ones that I can see being well served by having a life insurance policy as a single person .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
I think there is an image out there of single people as being carefree , unencumbered , no responsibilities . So no need for life insurance . However , I have come across so many single people that are just the opposite , that it makes you think : sure , a whole lot of single people really do need life insurance . Lets suppose you are a single person who is 22 years old . Youve got a girlfriend , or a boyfriend , or both -LRB- yep - sign of the times . -RRB- Just finishing up school , thinking about getting a job . You know at some point youll be married , or at least living with somebody , paying bills , forming some kind a codependent relationship . Maybe you will buy life insurance then . Why wait ? You know that pricing is based on age . Why wait four years when the price will be that much higher ? Buy it now . Lock in at the lowest rate available . Be smart . Now lets suppose youve got a bunch of college debt to carry around with you . Some credit card charges too . God forbid a drunk driver should nail you tomorrow night . Why would you want to saddle your family with these bills ? If your parents have cosigned the loan , or if you have a joint account , they are certainly exposed . Even if they havent , get them out of the line of fire of a greedy creditor . Pick up some cheap life insurance to protect them . Its the least you could do . Another point : do you know how many single men and women out there are successful ? Are making hefty incomes ? Are thriving entrepreneurs ? Tons . Many people postpone marriage and family to get their little empire launched . Along the way , they pick up bank debt . They have businesses to secure . They set up charitable foundations . They set up a whole network of financial interests , and they are at the center of that network . Where they to unfortunately disappear , the entire network would unravel . So they buy life insurance to secure their interests . As would any responsible mover and shaker .
In order to tell you how much car insurance is for a single person . And I assume this quote would be for the person who asked the question I would need to know several things . Your address , your date of birth , your drivers license number , type of vehicle , annual miles driven , in some areas your Social Security number . We would need to review the coverage 's you desire , I would also want to know your occupation and/or school history as there are additional discounts that may be available . While there are other questions I would have these are the basics . Then I can find out how much auto insurance would cost you .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Single premium life insurance involves paying one premium and no more while having life insurance coverage for life . It will be a modified endowment contract for tax purposes meaning it still has favorable tax treatment on the death benefit but annuity-like treatment on cash values . You do n't want to use single premium life if you plan to accessing cash value later . There are a wide variety of product types and different reasons to use them . A popular method within a narrow niche is to buy single premium life instead of an annuity if you are unlikely to need to access it for income in retirement as that the tax treatment and value of the asset at death will be more favorable . Another is to buy a single premium guaranteed universal life policy and fund with a single premium . The only issue is that reserving changes and low interest rates have impacted insurers so severely , this is an inefficient method of estate liquidity funding . Level pay guaranteed universal life is far better .
The amount of life insurance required by a single person is determined by the purpose for their coverage . E.g. . If they would like it to pay for outstanding debt at the time of their debt , they would want to get a policy with a face amount that covers that . If they want their policy to pay for their funeral , they would need a final expense policy of that amount . There are many ways that life insurance can be used to settle affairs upon the death of a single person . Because it does not have to go through probate , many single people find life insurance to be a simple and effective way of handling their estates .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
A `` single-premium immediate annuity -LRB- SPIA -RRB- '' is an annuity . That is to say , an annuity is defined as an income stream that continues until the annuitant dies when a person pays a lump sum of money -LRB- single premium -RRB- to an insurance company in exchange for that income stream -LRB- annuity -RRB- . So , the term `` single-premium immediate annuity '' is a bit redundant . Think of it as taking retirement money from a privately funded pension , except that , in this case , you are funding it with a one-time , lump-sum of money.The important thing to remember is that once you pay the single premium , that money is essentially `` gone '' . You have just `` purchased '' an income that you can not outlive.There are all sorts of ways to design the annuity -LRB- stream of income -RRB- . You can get a monthly check , quarterly check , annual check - just about any payment schedule you can think of . You can also have the annuity pay out completely should you die before the original single premium you gave to the insurance company gets paid out . Should you choose that option , you will need to name a `` beneficiary '' to receive the remainder of the payout.Annuities , in general , are complex insurance contracts and space is not provided here to go into all the details . But , be absolutely certain that an annuity is right for you before you fork over the money because once it is committed to the contract , you either ca n't get a refund or there are stiff surrender penalties associated with backing out of the deal . Work only with an experienced insurance professional that has a solid working knowledge of what annuities are , how they work , and whether or not it is in your best interest to own one . More advanced knowledge about annuities can be obtained by consumer-friendly websites online .
Long term care insurance premiums will vary greatly according to age , health , features of the policy , and area in which the policy is purchased . However , you could look at the federal guidelines for how much premium can be exempted on income tax returns , to get a general guide for life insurance premiums . In 2013 , they are : 40 and under : $ 360/single , $ 720/couple 41-50 : $ 680/single , $ 1,360 / couple 51-60 : $ 1,360 / single , $ 2,720 / couple 61-70 : $ 3,640 / single , $ 7,280 / couple 71 and up : $ 4,550 / single , $ 9,100 / couple
Securing coverage on your husband is like securing coverage on anyone else - you must have an insurable interest to buy a policy on another life as well as their consent to take out a life insurance policy on them . From there , there 's different types of programs to consider -LRB- term vs. universal vs. whole life and whether you 're ok with taking an exam or are strictly against it - you 're generally paying much higher rates with non-medical policies and the face amounts under a single policy are going to be limited -RRB- The risk class your husbandqualifiesfor determines the final premiums that you 'll pay -LRB- in addition to his age and if he uses any tobacco products -RRB- - please note , the risk class from company ABC may not be the same risk class he gets from company XYZ . Every company has their own underwriting guidelines and views risk on medical histories differently . I recommend consulting with a knowledgeable , experienced life insurance broker who can shop the case for you and review multiple carriers ' programs as well as complete a life insurance needs analysis -LRB- if you would like to determine how much coverage you need and how long you need it for - you can also look at a combination of benefits -LRB- e.g. some term and some permanent -RRB- -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Can You Use Life Insurance As Collateral ?
Yes , you can use life insurance as collateral . Many lenders require purchase of Term life insurance as collateral for individuals to obtain small business loans . The insured person and lender simply sign a collateral assignment form that assigns to the lender the amount of life insurance that is needed to cover repayment of the loan . The remainder of the death benefit is paid to the beneficiary of the borrower 's choice . Sometimes business use life insurance on a key employee to obtain business expansion loans .
Yes , you can use a life insurance policy as collateral in some situations . The Small Business Administration -LRB- SBA -RRB- often requires a life insurance policy on the borrower so that they can get their loan paid by the policy in case of death of the insured . Key employee life insurance can sometimes be used as collateral for obtaining business loans . To use a life insurance policy as collateral for a loan , most lenders require that the policy be assigned to them . This is done by a collateral assignment form . The beneficiary of the policy is usually a relative of the policy owner , but the collateral assignment form allows the lender to take what is owed to them first . Then the remainder goes to the beneficiary stated .
Yes , term life insurance can be used as collateral for some loans . Most commonly , we see people using term life insurance as collateral for loans through the SBA -LRB- Small Business Administration -RRB- . When the loan is expected to be paid off within 10 years , using a term life insurance policy is a very inexpensive way of providing collateral . Our office generally uses nonmed insurance for this type of need , so that it can be put into effect quickly .
Yes life insurance can be used as collateral and the way in which is used as collateral varies depending on intent . Some lenders require life insurance death benefit to back a loan balance , this is common for small business loans . In other cases , one can also pledge the cash surrender values in a life insurance policy as collateral to a loan . Many banks , thrifts , credit unions , and trust companies have written procedures on their requirements for pledging life insurance as collateral . Mostly that the company be an AM Best A or better rated carrier and that the loan to value ratio never exceed a certain percentage .
Collateral is an asset that you own that has value and the lender is accepting in order to provide you a loan . Term life insurance hasnt any value . A collateral assignment is an additional item to induce a lender to make a loan and term life insurance can be used in this case . The term policy is assigned to the lender who has the first right over the proceeds in the event of death . This way the lender will get his money whether the assets that collateralized the loans are adequate or not . Incidentally , permanent insurance can be used as collateral because it has value .
Yes , you can use life insurance as collateral . Many lenders require purchase of Term life insurance as collateral for individuals to obtain small business loans . The insured person and lender simply sign a collateral assignment form that assigns to the lender the amount of life insurance that is needed to cover repayment of the loan . The remainder of the death benefit is paid to the beneficiary of the borrower 's choice . Sometimes business use life insurance on a key employee to obtain business expansion loans .
There are a lot of factors to answer this question . First only cash value life insurance would be considered collateral . These are whole life , universal life , variable life and indexed universal life policies . Next the loan institution would have to approve it . Not all banks will consider life insurance as collateral . Contact the loan institution first and if they consider cash value life insurance as collateral then contact your life insurance company for an updated illustration for the exact cash value amount .
Depending on the type of policy you may be able to borrow from the cash value of the policy itself , or you may use the policy as collateral for a loan . Permanent life insurance policies have the ability to grow cash value - whole life is the best for this - but Term policies have no cash value and therefore are not usable as collateral for a loan . And not all banks will accept even Whole Life policies as collateral . You should check with the insurance company that your policy is with to see if there is an agreement in place where your policy may be used to secure a loan .
If the whole life policy has a cash value you can borrow from the insurance company using your policy as collateral . the amount you can borrow can be as high as 90 % . Check with your life insurance broker to be sure . In Canada , if you borrow in excess of the adjusted cost base of the policy , it will trigger a taxable event . If / when you repay the loan you receive an adjustment you can use when you file your taxes . If you borrow from a bank using the policy as collateral , it does not trigger a taxable event . Check with you life insurance broker , to be advised of the consequents of borrowing . If you do borrow reminder to at least pay the interest on the loan to avoid compound and putting the policy ar risk of lapsing . If you have further questions , or fell that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
At no time in the life of Term policies do they have cash value to borrow against , so no you can not borrow against a term policy . Additionally you can not use a term life policy as collateral for a loan as you can with a Whole Life policy . Credit term policies are designed to pay off a debt in the case of death of the debtor before the credit is repaid . On the other hand , Whole Life policies have cash value , grow wealth tax free , may be used as collateral and may be borrowed against . Contact me for more information .
I have not heard of a ROTH IRA being used as Collateral however , I suppose you might be able to put together a `` collateral assignment '' which means upon death , the unpaid collateral will be taken out of the value the ROTH is as the time of death with the remaining balance going to your heirs . I would have to do more research to be sure this would hold up as a contract however . You might be better off getting a small life insurance policy to cover that debt if that is indeed what you are covering .
In Canada , you can not borrow directly from your retirement plan . Also you can not use your retirement plan as collateral for a loan . There is an indirect borrowing option with Retirement Compensation Agreement -LRB- RCA -RRB- where some lenders will use the refundable tax as collateral . If you would like to work with a local Retirement Planner , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : retirement planner Halifax or retirement planning Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find Retirement Planners in your community . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
An assignee for life insurance is the person or entity that would get part of the proceeds of a life insurance policy upon the death of the Insured . Life insurance is sometimes used as collateral for a loan , and a collateral assignment form is used . The assignee is the lender and the amount of the death benefit that would be received is the amount remaining on the loan .
NO ... a lien can not be placed on Life Insurance . UNLESS you have given or using the cash value and/or the policy as collateral . If the loan which the collateral is being used to secure gets defaulted on , then yes , the collector can take the policy/cash value to pay off any balance . Life Insurance by nature is outside the reach of creditors such as your 401 -LRB- k -RRB- .
Ill tell you one way they can : by making them the beneficiary on your policy . Its a common mistake , and it can be costly . When men and women go into business for themselves , they often take out a bank loan to jumpstart the enterprise . Many lending institutions require life insurance to be in force on the borrower . They simply do not want to have to chase the heirs or estate custodians in case their client unfortunately dies before the loan is paid up . The question is , how can you arrange for them to get only the amount that is due on the loan at the time of death ? You may take out $ 1 million loan initially , but seven years down the road you may owe only $ 750,000 . How do you prevent them from getting the entire million dollars of benefit ? One very effective way of accomplishing this is through the use of a collateral assignment . As soon as the policy is put into force , the owner signs an agreement signing over the benefit to the lender . But , the agreement is careful to stipulate that only the outstanding amount of the loan would be payable . This is how it would work : the estate of the insured files a claim . The insurance carrier sees from their file that a collateral assignment has been executed . They then contact the lender for proof of the outstanding amount . Once that proof is provided , they are sent a check . The beneficiary gets the rest . The lender gets only what they are due , as they should . But I think you can see the trouble that could be caused if you made the lender the beneficiary . They would get the entire amount of the benefit even if they are not owed that much ! The collateral assignment is a neat little tool that is not complicated and can be executed in a day . But it goes along way towards securing your life insurance benefit for both your creditors and your beneficiaries .
We get a lot of customers looking for short Term Life Insurance policies as collateral for loans , as required by the Small Business Administration . By assigning the life insurance policy to the SBA , the Small Business Administration is assured that they will get their money back if the borrower meets with an untimely death . Because the term is short , the cost is very reasonable . This type of request is usually on a rush basis , so we generally use a No Exam policy that has low cost choices . Please feel free to contact us any time for life insurance as collateral for your loan .
You can not borrow against Term Life Insurance to get cash from the Term policy , because there is no cash value in Term life insurance . But you can use your Term life insurance policy as collateral to get a loan in some situations . E.g. . The SBA often requires the purchase of a short term life insurance insurance policy when they issue loans . You would need to ask your lender if they are OK with collateral assignment of your policy as terms of obtaining a loan .
There are benefits to owning a whole life insurance policy . 1 -RRB- Premiums never go up . They stay the same for the life of the policy 2 -RRB- They accumulate a cash value . As you continue to pay premiums your cash value increases 3 -RRB- You can borrow against the cash value . Its like borrowing money from yourself . You get no payment book or notices for repayment . You pay it back when you want to , if you want to . 4 -RRB- Level death benefit - will pay the face amount of the policy upon your death 5 -RRB- Some allow you to add additional riders - these can enhance the provisions of your policy . 6 -RRB- Can be used as collateral - with a sufficient cash value you can actually use that value as collateral for a loan outside of the one your insurance company can provide . It will depend on the circumstances . Whole life insurance can be a great tool to protect your family from unexpected expenses .
Life insurance can be an integral part of retirement planning and has many uses . Permanent life insurance that will be in force when you die not if you die within the term can be used to help use maximize income . In addition it provide cash at death to pay taxes , equalize you estate . In other words owning life insurance gives you more flexibility with your planning . Cash value life insurance is an asset that can be used to supplement income or as collateral for a loan . How life insurance could be best utilized is of course based on your individual objectives . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
Life insurance is required as collateral at the lenders request . The SBA does not require life insurance on every loan so check with your lender to determine what the requirements are . The SBA website has a loan checklist you can download . If your lender does require life insurance , you can use an existing policy assuming it meets the collateral requirements laid out by the lender or you can purchase a new policy for the exact amount of coverage required by the lender . The best idea is to check with the lender to see whats required .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Transamerica Life Insurance Good ?
Transamerica Life Insurance Company is highly rated and carries a variety of products . Transamerica America Family Markets offers a term life insurance product that provides living benefits , as well . To find competitive quotes for Transamerica and many other good life insurance companies , visit a website that provides instant life insurance quotes . That way you can compare prices all in one spot .
Transamerica Life Insurance Company , Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Company and Transamerica Advisors Life Insurance Company are under the parent company Aegon . At this time , these companies are rated A + by AM Best . They offer an array of good products at competitive prices . Transamerica Life Insurance is a good company with good products .
Here is a list of companies , all A-rated , that Quality Term Life quotes on our website . American General Life Insurance Company American National Insurance Company Aviva Life and Annuity Company AXA Equitable Life Insurance Company Baltimore Life Insurance Company Banner Life Insurance Company Fidelity Life Association Genworth Life and Annuity Insurance Co John Hancock Life Insurance Company USA John Hancock Life Insurance Company NY Lincoln National Life Insurance Company MetLife Investors USA Insurance Company Minnesota Life Insurance Company MTL Insurance Company Nationwide Life and Annuity Insurance Co North American Co for Life and Health Ohio National Life Assurance Corporation Pruco Life Insurance Company ReliaStar Life Insurance Company -LRB- ING -RRB- ReliaStar Life Insurance of NY -LRB- ING -RRB- Royal Neighbors of America Sagicor Life Insurance Company Savings Bank Life Insurance Co of MA Securian Life Insurance Company Transamerica Financial Life Insurance Co Transamerica Life Insurance Company United Home Life Insurance Company United of Omaha Life Insurance Company Note that you will see many big names missing here . Like AAA , Farmers , State Farm , etc. . That 's because these companies require their agents to sell only their life insurance , in other words they are n't independent , so no shopping around for you . And their prices tend to be much higher for similar coverage .
Transamerica Life Insurance Company is highly rated and carries a variety of products . Transamerica America Family Markets offers a term life insurance product that provides living benefits , as well . To find competitive quotes for Transamerica and many other good life insurance companies , visit a website that provides instant life insurance quotes . That way you can compare prices all in one spot .
Transamerica offers competitive life insurance products and underwriting . Transamerica is rated A + AM Best , AA - S&P , A1 Moodys & AA - Fitch . All their related companies are 93 or better with Comdex . Transamerica is a top 20 company in term and guaranteed universal life insurance .
Transamerica Life Insurance Company is owned by AEGON Group . The company offers Term and Permanent life insurance policies along with Long Term Care Insurance and other products . To find competitive quotes for Transamerica and many other life insurance companies , visit a website that provides instant life insurance quotes to compare prices .
There are hundreds and hundreds of good lifeinsurance companies . There are certain things to look for in getting good products at good premiums . First look for life insurance companies that specialize in life insurance and not the car or health companies that sell life insurance as a product line . You can choose well known life companies like Metlife , Prudential , NY Life , Transamerica , ING or John Hancock . These are great life insurance companies with big marketing budgets so theydo not always have the best premiums for the coverage . There are great little known life insurance companies like SBLI , Banner , Genworth , Assurity or Minnesota Life that usually independent brokers know about but not the general public because they do n't market their company and many times have better premiums for the same exact product of the well known names . Second look at the companies ratings with AM Best , Moody 's , Standard Poor 's and Fitch . Only choose `` A '' rated companies for financial strength . You want the company to pay your loved ones when you die .
Monumental Life Insurance Co. is an A + rated life insurance and supplemental insurance company out of Baltimore , Maryland . They are owned by Aegon , one of the largest insurance groups in the world out of the Netherlands . Monumental Life and it 's sister company Transamerica focus on a variety of life insurance , but Monumental 's niche market seems to be affordable whole life insurance and final expense life insurance for seniors . Monumental Life has an endorsement from AARP to market senior life products .
Stonebridge Life Insurance company is a smaller insurance company compared to the those like Transamerica , American General , Aviva Life and Assurity . That said , this does not mean Stonebridge is bad . In fact some of the life products fit very well meeting the needs some people have . Their rates are competitive and underwriting is as good as the bigger companies .
Stonebridge Life Insurance Company is a sister company to Transamerica . Both are AEGON companies . Stonebridge life insurance is offered in several types of policies , including Term and Whole Life . To compare Stonebridge Life Insurance rates with the rates of life insurance with other companies , you can look for instant life insurance quotes on internet quote engines , or call a life insurance agency that carries policies from more than one company .
There are literally hundreds of life insurance companies in the United States alone and hundreds more abroad . Some of the more well known companies are Metlife , Genworth , NY Life , Prudential , American General , ING , Transamerica and Northwestern Mutual . You know these companies because of their marketing budgets . In most cases these companies have higher premiums because they must of set their advertising budgets . There are several other lesser known life insurance companies like SBLI , Banner Life , Assurity , North American , Fidelity Security and AXA Equitible that usually a life insurance broker would know . These companies are just as good and financially sound as the more well known companies , they just do n't have the larger marketing budgets and rely on brokers to sell their policies . This usually translates into more affordable premiums to the consumer . I recommend contacting an independent broker to professionally shop for the best polices at the best rates for your unique situation .
Stonebridge Life Insurance Company is an AEGON company , as is Transamerica . JC Penney uses Stonebridge Life Insurance for its company 's customers . Stonebridge Life Insurance Company offers Term life insurance with several choices of term lengths , and Whole Life insurance . To compare Stonebridge Life Insurance rates with those of other companies , find an instant quote engine on the internet or call an agency that sells more than several products and compare them `` apples to apples '' .
That 's a great question ! Peoples Life was purchased by Monumental Insurance Company . They are a subsidiary of Transamerica . The company is located in Cedar Rapids , Iowa and have been in business since 1858 . They are a good company , and one I use frequently . If you would like contact information , or details , please feel free to contact me , okay ? Thanks for asking !
Peoples Benefit Life Insurance Company -LRB- sometimes called People 's Life Insurance Company of Washington , DC -RRB- merged with Monumental Life Insurance Company on October 1 , 2007 . Monumental Life is licensed in 49 states -LRB- all except New York -RRB- and is also licensed in the Distric of Columbia . Monumental Life is part of the Transamerica Agency Network and the AEGON Insurance Group .
Merrill Lynch Life Insurance Company , and Merrill Lynch Life Insurance Company of New York , were bought by AEGON in Aug , 2007 . Now Merrill Lynch is in a partnership with AEGON to sell their life insurance products under the company , Transamerica Advisors Life Insurance Company , based in Little Rock , Arkansas .
Monumental Life Insurance Company joined with Life Investors Financial Group , Inc , to form Transamerica Agency Network , Inc , in 2011 . Monumental Life Insurance Company was founded in 1858 . The Aegon USA Group , of which Monumental Life is now a part , was rated A + by AM Best recently . To compare Monumental Life insurance quotes from those from other companies , visit a website with that offers instant quotes .
I 'm assuming that you want to know what company offers the least expensive Term life insurance policies in general . Most likely that would be an insurance provider that specializes in Term insurance and does n't do a lot of expensive advertising . Personally as a broker I only work with companies that are A + rated or better by the 4 independent rating agencies , and among those I 've found that Genworth , Banner , and Transamerica usually come in with the lowest rates . However the specific circumstances of the insured will have a bearing on the premiums . Gender , age and health , as well as the length of the term and the face amount of the policy each have a good deal of impact on the premium . My question to you , or rather my advise would be to get with a qualified Insurance Adviser and find out how a term policy may benefit you with your particular needs , and if Term may NOT be what you should be looking at implementing . Term insurance is the cheapest of the different types of life insurance to be sure . But is Cheap what you want or need , or is it rather Value that will benefit you the most ?
Dave Ramsey recommends using Zander Insurance Group , an agency that sells term life insurance products from a number of different companies . Some of these companies are American General , Banner , Genworth , Protective , Transamerica and United of Omaha . In other words , the same companies most of us life insurance brokers offer to our clients .
There 's hundreds and hundreds of companies out there . A list of some of the top companies is as follows : 1 -RRB- American General 2 -RRB- MetLife 3 -RRB- Lincoln National Life 4 -RRB- Prudential 5 -RRB- Transamerica 6 -RRB- ING 7 -RRB- Principal National 8 -RRB- Mass Mutual 9 -RRB- Guardian 10 -RRB- Banner Life 11 -RRB- Genworth 12 -RRB- New York Life 13 -RRB- United of Omaha / Mutual of Omaha 14 -RRB- SBLI -LRB- Savings Bank Life Insurance Company of Massachusetts -RRB- 15 -RRB- John Hancock When looking for a life insurance policy , there 's a ton of information to sift through and comprehend . An independent broker can help you find the program that will best serve your needs . If you would like some assistance , send me a private message on here or check out my website -LRB- a link is available on my profile page -RRB- .
Geico themselves does not offer life insurance policies - the coverage programs secured through the Geico agency are written through non-affiliated insurance companies -LRB- e.g. Genworth , Aviva , Transamerica , MetLife , etc. -RRB- . If you try to run a quote on Geico 's website , you are re-directed to another quoting site that Geico does not own . There 's numerous insurance companies out there . I would recommend working with an independent agent so you can see a wider range of options that are available to you . If you have any other questions or would like assistance with your life insurance needs , send me a message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What Does Basic Medicare Cover ?
Basic Medicare , Medicare Part A and Part B cover most health care that is considered to be medically necessary . Cosmetic surgery for vanity reasons is an example of something that is not medically necessary . Part A covers hospital inpatient related charges after you have satisfied your deductible . Part B covers outpatient charges after the deductible .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I do n't think is a matter of `` need '' for a medicare advantage plan , but a matter of choice . Would a Medicare Advantage plan be a better choice compared to a supplement or going with just basic medicare ? It is wise to compare these options and how they will effect you . As Ted has noted , there are some advantages to Medicare Advantage plans that make them very attractive as a choice to a consumer . So , it might be better to consider a simple basic difference between Medicare supplements and Medicare Advantage , Medicare `` rights '' . When you purchase a Medicare Advantage you are assigning your Medicare rights to that organization and commit to service -LRB- outside of emergency -RRB- to that organization as they become your Medicare provider . A Medicare Supplement does not restrict the insured to any one location or provider . For some people , this is a very important issue and could be the deciding factor .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Basic Medicare , that is Medicare part a , does not cover any prescriptions outside of what 's administered during a hospital stay . If you have Medicare part D or Medicare Advantage prescription drugs are covered as part of your plan . Of course you have your co-pay share to cover so nothing is completely covered . But as long as a medication is prescribed and you have Medicare part D or Advantage it 's covered .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans , provide quotes from multiple carriers , and can help you determine the one that 's going to be most suitable to your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
People sometimes confuse Medicare Part A with Medicare Supplement Plan A. `` Part '' A is part of original Medicare that is your hospital coverage and goes along with Part B. Folks then get a Medicare Supplement to cover what A & B does not . Medicare Supplement Plan A is a very basic supplement plan that covers Medicare Part A coinsurance , Medicare Part B coinsurance and Part A hospice care coinsurance . It will also cover your first 3 pints of blood .
There are 3 policy forms for property insurance . Basic , Broad and Special . Basic will cover , Fire , Lightning , Windstorm or Hail , Explosion , Smoke , Vandalism , Aircraft or Vehicle Collision , Riot or Civil Commotion , Sinkhole Collapse , Volcanic Activity . Broad will cover all of Basic plus falling objects , weight of ice , sleet or snow , and accidental water damage . Special will cover everything that is not specifically excluded . If the policy does not exclude the coverage you are covered . Common exclusion are government action , nuclear hazard , war and military action , flood , fungus and pollution . Special Form gives you the broadest coverage 's . Now with special form you have a choice of an HO3 or an HO5 An HO3 is named perils for personal property and HO5 is open perils minus exclusion for personal property . While HO3 is the most common policy purchased the HO5 is the broadest coverage you can get in a homeowners policy .
Medicare supplement plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- covers appoximately 80 % of your healthcare expenses . Medicare supplements -LRB- or commonly referred to as Medigap -RRB- plans help provide coverage for the other 20 % . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N. Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . For example , Plan A offers coverage of only the basic benefits of Medicare Supplement Insurance , while Plan F is the most comprehensive . Plan F also offers a high-deductible version of the plan it is the only plan that offers this feature . Under a high-deductible plan F -LRB- also referred to as Hi-F -RRB- , the insured must pay for Medicare-covered costs up to the years deductible amount $ 2,140 in 2014 before the supplement plan pays anything . The benefit of the high-deductible plan F is that it offers the insured a much lower monthly premium . There are 9 benefits available in Medigap plans : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance and hospital costs up to an additional 365 days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment 5 -RRB- Skilled nursing facility care coinsurance 6 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 7 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 8 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 9 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to limits as cited in the plans -RRB- Each plan provides a percentage of coverage for the first 4 benefits . From there , each plan features some or all of the other 5 benefits . Plan F is the most comprehensive benefit as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Plan G is almost identical as it covers 8 benefits at 100 % -LRB- the one it does n't cover is the Part B deductible . Plan N is also very competitive - as long as your primary care doctor accepts Medicare and assignment , your only other payment other than your premium would be the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- and a copay at the doctor 's office -LRB- up to $ 20 per visit -RRB- or hospital -LRB- up to $ 50 per visit -RRB- . I highly recommend downloading a copy of the Medigap guidebook on the Medicare.gov website - the guidebook is titled `` Choosing a Medigap Policy : A Guide to Health Insurance for People with Medicare . '' Agents will have this on hand as well - it 's required to be given to the proposed insured if they decide to apply for a plan . You can send me a private message if you 'd like me to e-mail it to you . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage including plan quotes and comparisons . Thanks very much .
Medicare covers the same basic health care in Massachusetts as in the rest of the country . Part A covers hospitalization , home health , hospice , and some nursing home care . Part B covers outpatient care , medical equipment , some therapy , some prescription drugs , and misc other services and items . Medicare Part D covers prescription drugs . Medicare supplement plans cover some of what Medicare Part A and B does not .
Secondary insurance would refer to an individual under 65 health insurance policy or a group health insurance policy through your employer . Medicare Supplement insurance -LRB- also referred to as Medigap plans -RRB- help cover the `` gaps '' in original Medicare -LRB- the common name for your Medicare Part A & Part B coverage -RRB- . Original Medicare pays for approximately 80 % of your health care expenses leaving you responsible for the other 20 % . While 20 % does n't seem like much , the dollar amount it equates to can become a very large figure if you have to go to the hospital , have surgical procedures , or get a bunch of tests done . Depending on which Medicare Supplement plan you get -LRB- there are 11 different plans in total -RRB- , it can help cover all or a portion of that other 20 % . The 11 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , N , and high-deductible plan F. High-deductible plan F features the same benefits as plan F , except it has a deductible to be met first -LRB- $ 2,180 in 2015 -RRB- - the trade-off being a much reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . Medicare Supplement plans F and G are the most comprehensive and by far the most popular because they create the most predictable expense structures for seniors . If you 're looking for prescription drug coverage as well , that can be added via a stand-alone Part D prescription drug plan . When you 're looking to buy a Medicare Supplement plan , you should consult with an independent Medicare Supplement insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medicare Supplement plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the coverage of a given plan letter is exactly the same regardless of you have the coverage through - the only difference is the price you pay for it . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare Supplement Plan A is required to be offered by all insurance companies who offer Medicare supplement plans . This plan covers 100 % of the basic benefits that can be offered by insurance companies under a Medicare supplement plan and is suitable for individuals on a budget who want to have a little more coverage than what Medicare Part A and Part B provides . Medicare Supplement Plan A Covered Benefits : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment Benefits not covered : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Medicare supplement plans can be purchased through an insurance agent/broker .
No , root canals are covered under Dental Insurance Policies , and usually as a basic service . You would need to purchase a dental plan to cover that procedure . Most traditional dental plans cover it as a basic service , with an 80/20 coinsurance after the deductible . That 's where you pay the deductible first , then the plan pays 80 % of the bill , and you pay 20 % . But , before you just buy a dental plan , and go get the procedure , check to make sure what the waiting period for basic services is ... Many dental plans have a 6-12 month waiting period for those types of procedures .
It varies by UL policy and company , but here are a few basics . There are basically 2 parts to all ULs , but there may be more . The one I have has 3 parts . Part A is how much you pay into for just the life insurance coverage and part B is what goes into the accumulation account to make the policy grow money wise . A UL has flexible premiums meaning you can pay in as little or as much as you want within a specified amount within the contract guidelines . There is also the target amount which is what you probably should be paying in minimally . If you pay the minimum , it basically is a term policy that continues . If you decide you want the account to grow , you can put more money into to make the cash accumulation grow . I usually tell the clients I work with to think of it as a permanent life policy with a high yield bank savings account since most will offer you at worst a 3 % return for ever dollar you put into the accumulation section of the account . Do keep in mind that rates maybe be more or less depending on the policy and current interest rates that the insurance company uses . There are many other factors in these types of life policies , but that is the basics of it .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
What Company Has The Cheapest Renters Insurance In New Jersey ?
The desire to have Renters Insurance is one that varies in different geographic areas ; the decision to purchase Renters Insurance is either due to sense of responsibility , the requirement by the Landlord or both ! The mostaffordable Renters Insurance in New Jersey is underwritten by Stillwater Insurance Group . Renters Insurance is a very valuable and inexpensive option to cover the tenant fromthe results of a Negligent Act ; this would be covered by the Personal Liability section of the policy , this part is also not subject to the deductible on the policy . In addition to the Personal Liability section , thepolicy will offer protection for Personal Contents against a number of perils including Fire , Theft , Water Damage and a number of additional perils listed on the specific policy . Coverage forms vary from State to State . There is an online method to obtain a quote and purchase renters insurance online directly in multiple States ; the following linkwill be very helpful : WEBSITELINK It is our recommendation to select the highest available Liability Limit , the sufficient amount of Personal Property and a high deductible ; these selections will produce ample coverage with a low premium rate . For additional questions and/or assistance not available on the automated process , we recommend contacting a licensed professional for guidance .
The most expensive car insurance rates are typically found in Louisiana , New Jersey , New York , Nevada , Florida , and Michigan . Prices are typically high in these states for a combination of factors that include high cost of vehicle repairs , larger number of uninsured drivers , larger percentage of younger drivers , and more accidents per resident . Other factors can impact auto insurance prices including the incidence of natural disasters in that state , along with the type of weather . For instance , many Northeastern states have been battered with higher-than-expected snowfall totals , which has caused a spike in the number of reported accidents . As demographics of states change , including the percentage of younger/older drivers on the road , prices can also change . Other states that often have higher-than-average auto insurance prices include Delaware , Alaska , Maryland , Texas , and Connecticut . States that often feature some of the cheapest rates include Iowa , Idaho , Wisconsin , North Dakota , Maine , Ohio , and South Dakota . IMPORTANT NOTE : This question was answered by Ed Harris , one of the premier car insurance brokers in the US , with more than 34 years of experience helping consumers find the best auto insurance options . One of his top-rated websites is Carinsurancezoom.org , which allows consumers to instantly view the companies that offer the cheapest prices in their zip code .
The answer will depend on your individual and family circumstances , objectives and resources . If you are a Breadwinner , or a stay at home parent in New Jersey chances are your significant other will be greatly impacted financially due to an untimely death . Some life insurance protection is better than none especially if you have dependents , or loved ones who are relying on your future income . Some options for life insurance in New Jersey are Group Life Insurance which may be offered by your employer , or an industry association . This is not to say group life is the best in New Jersey , it is just one of a few options . Other considerations are individual term life insurance , or permanent life insurance like whole life , universal life , variable life and indexed universal life .
The states that require Short Term Disability Insurance are California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York and Rhode Island . A few states offer disability to low income citizens in others ways . California , New Jersey and Rhode Island offer state Disability Insurance or Temporary State Disability Insurance . Puerto Rico also offers a Public Temporary Disability Insurance plan .
The desire to have Renters Insurance is one that varies in different geographic areas ; the decision to purchase Renters Insurance is either due to sense of responsibility , the requirement by the Landlord or both ! The mostaffordable Renters Insurance in New Jersey is underwritten by Stillwater Insurance Group . Renters Insurance is a very valuable and inexpensive option to cover the tenant fromthe results of a Negligent Act ; this would be covered by the Personal Liability section of the policy , this part is also not subject to the deductible on the policy . In addition to the Personal Liability section , thepolicy will offer protection for Personal Contents against a number of perils including Fire , Theft , Water Damage and a number of additional perils listed on the specific policy . Coverage forms vary from State to State . There is an online method to obtain a quote and purchase renters insurance online directly in multiple States ; the following linkwill be very helpful : WEBSITELINK It is our recommendation to select the highest available Liability Limit , the sufficient amount of Personal Property and a high deductible ; these selections will produce ample coverage with a low premium rate . For additional questions and/or assistance not available on the automated process , we recommend contacting a licensed professional for guidance .
There is no one type of life insurance policy , or one particular life insurance company , that is best in New Jersey . Finding your best policy will take into account your health , age , income , the amount of life insurance that you need , and the purpose for your coverage . It may be a good idea to visit with an agency that sells life insurance in New Jersey to find the best policy for you .
To apply for Medicare Part D in New Jersey , a good website to go to is : WEBSITELINK . There you will find some Medicare Part D plans to enroll in and how to enroll in Medicare Part D plans in New Jersey . They also provide a phone number where you can contact them to enroll in Medicare Part D.
Medicare is operated by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services -LRB- CMS -RRB- , which is part of the Department of Health and Human Services in cooperation with the Social Security Administration , it does not have a central claim-paying office for incoming claims . Rather , large insurance companies , chosen within each state , actually administer the claim payment process . So , from state to state , claim submissions are submitted to different entities . For example , claimants living in New Jersey submit claims to the New Jersey Medicare Claim Office .
To get Life Insurance online in New Jersey , go to a website that offers life insurance in your state . You can input your date of birth in an `` instant '' quote engine to see if a quote comes up for New Jersey , look for a site that offers life insurance in all 50 states , or put your zip code where requested . Once you get the quote . the online agency will guide you through the rest of the process . It is different for different types of policies and different companies . But in the end you have a policy just as if you had walked into a life insurance office , and you will not have had to drive anywhere or have someone in your home to purchase it .
Buying life insurance online in New Jersey simply involves finding an online insurance agency that does business in the state of New Jersey . You can find such resources by searching on line for agencies or agents who do business in New Jersey . You will find several places from which you can purchase life insurance online .
New Jersey Manufacturing Insurance Group offers personal auto insurance , homeowners or renters insurance , flood insurance , and umbrella insurance . Per their website , they do not offer life insurance . To find a life insurance quote , visit a website that offers many companies , in put your information into a quote engine that offers instant quotes , and compare prices .
The states of California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island require disability insurance to be provided to state residents for income provision due to non-work related disabilities . Puerto Rico also has a disability insurance requirement .
Oxford Health , which is now owned by UnitedHealthcare , offers individual insurance coverage in the states of New York and New Jersey . You can apply for coverage by contacting Oxford directly , or be contacting an independent agent that represents the company . I always suggest working with an independent agent , as they have your best interests at hurt , not that of some insurance company that may be their employer .
The states that offer Short Term Disability benefits are California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . California offers Short Term Disability that can last up to one year . New York requires most employers to offer Short Term Disability coverage . New Jersey , Rhode Island and Hawaii offer Temporary Disability -LRB- TD -RRB- benefits .
There are five states that have mandatory disability insurance laws . These states are : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . The exact provisions of these mandatory disability insurance laws varies by state . You can obtain additional specific information about your state 's mandatory disability insurance law by checking with the states department of insurance -LRB- aka insurance commissioner 's office -RRB- .
I can sell policies in New Jersey and in New York . There are many companies that offer this coverage . Some plans may be different than others however they do serve their purpose . I work with all major carriers which is best to give you the best coverages at the best rates . It is best to speak with a licensed agent to obtain a specific coverage option . I am licensed and I have many plans from the top carrier for this coverage .
Oxford Health Insurance is a large reputable insurer and is part of UnitedHealthcare . It offers coverage primarily in New York , New Jersey and Connecticut . Their rats are typically very competitive and they have a wide range of products for individuals and families . A licensed broker can review and shop their plans for you .
State disability insurance is a government mandated program that many people mistakenly believe they have , but do n't . Only five states require private workers to participate in a short term disability program : California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island . Forty five states do not have mandated state short term disability . Social Security Disability Insurance is managed at the state level , but is a federally funded program . Temporary disabilities are not covered .
The states that have laws mandating Disability Insurance are California , Hawaii , New Jersey , New York , and Rhode Island , as well as Puerto Rico . Of these , only California offers a policy that is purchased through the state , and only California uses the exact words , `` State Disability Insurance '' in reference to their state 's program . However , at least short term disability coverage is offered to employees in all these states .
Most states are not no-fault states . However , there are a handful of states that are considered `` no fault . '' Based on my 32 years of experience in the business -LRB- and I do make mistakes ! -RRB- , I believe these states are no fault . But you can always check with the State Dept. Of Insurance to verify : Pennsylvania Florida Michigan New Jersey Utah Minnesota North Dakota Kentucky Massachusetts Hawaii Minnesota New York
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Can I Have Car Insurance From Another State ?
Your auto insurance policy will cover you in all 50 states and US territories and Canada so you never have to worry about a coverage gap as you take that cross country trip with your family . If you move to a different state , that coverage will follow you , however , in most cases , states will have a regulation stipulating that you will need to register your car in that state within a certain period of time after establishing residency . In CT the time frame is 30 days . BecauseCT also requires that you have proof of car insurance issued in CT , you willhave to obtain insurance here in order to register your car . I believe that most states have similar regulations .
Auto insurers must be admitted in the state where they do business . If you have moved from one state to another the insurance in force will continue in force until you have changed your domicile . Thereafter you must deal with an insurance company admitted in that state . There is a strange exception called Excess and Surplus lines , but I doubt that will apply to you and your car .
Although you can not purchase a policy from another State than the one you live in , if you find yourself needing to move in the middle of a policy , you do not need to cancel the existing one and purchase a new one in the new State right away . All policies are valid regardless of the State you are driving in , so if you go on vacation , you do n't need to buy a new policy for every State you drive through . However , once you move out of one State and into another , you will need to purchase a policy in your new location . Typically the current insurance company will send you a Notice of Non-Renewal prior to the renewal of your existing policy . But until the policy comes up for renewal , you are able to keep the policy you have in place .
If you live in one state and are fortunate enough to also own a vacation home in another , and you choose to have a car registered in state for your use while you are there , then it is possible , if not required that you have a car insurance policy in that state . Most if not all states require car insurance in order to register a car for use on public access roads and highways and in most cases , that insurance must be obtained in the state in which the car is registered . Honestly that is the only circumstance I can think of where you may have insurance on a car from another state which is not where you primarily reside .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
The first penalty is that you more than likely would not be able to register your car for use on public roads . Most States require car insurance in order to do that . If you had car insurance but let it lapse , or cancel it , the Insurance Company in many states like Connecticut , will notify the Department of Motor Vechicles -LRB- DMV -RRB- . They will contact you and require you to show proof of coverage . If you can not , they will suspend your registration andit will be illigal to drive your car -LRB- s -RRB- . If you do drive and are stopped by a police officer , along with the charge for which you have been stopped , you will also be found to be driving an unregistered and uninsured car which will add to the size of your fine . In many cases the car will be towed and impounded and you will have to find another means of transportation back home , for which you may have to pay . You may also be required to appear in court . Once that is behind you , in order to get your car back , you will have to show proof that you have bought insurance again . It will be more expensive now because of the violations and the fact that you have not had continuous coverage . You will also have to pay to have the car releassed from the impound facility . You will have lost considerable time from work for all of this meaning that on top of having to shell out more money , you will have lost pay . Bottom line ... do n't drive without insurance .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
Lets say you have a hundred friends and each has an automobile . If they could agree that they wanted to have enough money to pay legal expenses that they might have if they are responsible for an accident , you could form an insurance company . If you were able to determine -LRB- from actuarial studies -RRB- the amount of money you could anticipate spending in helping each other out in the coming year and the amount was $ 50,000 you would then know the basic share for each friend , $ 500 -LRB- $ 50,000 / 100 -RRB- Someone in your group will probably object because they only take their car to shows once or twice a year and certainly dont have the exposure the rest of the friends have . Another will object because they live on a farm and rarely drive into town -LRB- although it might be a long ways . -RRB- They will contend that their exposure is less than the other friends . Another friend will complain because one of the friends has a street-legal racing car and it is more likely that it will be involved in an accident . One of your friends has a drinking problem and no one really wants a share of his legal liability . And so it goes . What at one time seemed simple and logical becomes increasingly complex . Actuaries are a rare group of people who compile data and have the ability to slice that data in many different ways to determine the effects of the location where the car is garaged , average annual miles , credit risk of the owner , make , model and year of the vehicle . In fact , these actuaries can compute over 100 rating areas for an automobile . The point that this exercise makes is to distribute the risk that all of us face equitably . I have been asked if a red car costs more to insure than others . I am sure that a study somewhere has shown that red cars have a slightly higher than average accident rate . It is something that could be used in the rating process . I have been asked if a previously totaled car , now registered legally can be insured based upon that same concern for a fair premium . So actuaries give the insurance company many alternatives upon which they can design a rating scheme for an automobile . In my state the scheme is set by state law . Actually the California Constitution dictates how automobile policies will be rated . So legislative action can have a profound effect on automobile rating . Most states give authority to their insurance commissioner to regulate automobile insurance rates . Their charge is not so much to maintain fairness as it is to make sure that the companies take in enough premiums to pay the claims that are anticipated . In other words , the commissioner does everything in his or her power to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . Insurance companies keep very close tabs on the claims that they pay and the premiums that they take in . Actually the actuaries get involved in this as well , to determine if they are charging enough for every different type of coverage . When the company fails to receive enough premiums to pay all of the claims in a given year , they approach the commissioner and propose a rate increase . At this point the company has done everything possible to spread the risk appropriately , however , there are some areas that they want to adjust to make sure that the company is being fair and that the company can continue to keep its promises . That is how a company computes what it will charge you for your car .
There are two issues here . First , you state that you do not have car insurance yet were driving . I can only assume that the car you were driving is your own , registered to you . In a state like Connecticut , where it is required by law to carry car insurance in order to register and drive a car on public roads and highways , if a police officer was on the scene , you would have been issued a ticket . and possibly would have had your car towed . The second issue is that you wer hit by another car . That person , in the absense of any other details , would probably be held at fault for the accident and therefore their insurance company would pay for the damage repair to your car .
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
When you move to Montana and register your car in the state then you have to switch your insurance to Montana . If your car is still registered in another state then you can keep that insurance providing it has the same limits or higher Montanan liability limits for minimum are 25,000 / 50,000 / 10,000 But If you have moved to Montana then you need to register your car in Montana you have I believe 30 days to register your car in the state once you have moved here .
Assuming that you mean due to the replacement of your existing car with another , then yes , coverage would be handled as a transfer replacement on your policy . Otherwise , you would have to buy a new policy every time you bought another vehicle or swapped one for another . It is best to talk with your Insurance Professional about the transaction in order to make sure the transfer of coverage from one car to the other is handled properly and without any un necessary delay . If you are replacing an older car that may not have Collision coverage to a newer car where it is either advisable or required -LRB- by the terms of your loan or lease agreement -RRB- then be sure to talk to your advisor about making sure your revised policy will include all of the required coverage . That is also a great time to talk about any and all available discounts .
This is a complicated question and really depends upon the insurance laws of your state . No-Fault States : if you live in a no-fault state then you could potentially leave your car in the street without insurance ONLY IF your car is parked in a legal zone and in a safe manner . What I mean by this is you do not want your parked car to be at risk for any liability in the case of an accident . For example , if you are parked on the street outside your house and it is within a couple of inches of the curb and no where near a fire hydrant , then if someone hits your car they will collect against their own insurance and you will not be liable if they sustain any severe physical injuries . However , if your car is in an illegal parking zone or you parked far from the curb , then the person who struck your auto might have cause for a liability suit against you . As a word of caution , just remember that you can get sued regardless of fault and you will have to defend the case until it is dismissed for lack of liability . This means you will still have to pay for an attorney , so it is better to have insurance . Tort-State : you need insurance because they person who hits your parked car will sue you to reclaim collision damages . Please note this is a very brief answer and there are other possible scenarios in both no-fault states and tort-states that can lead to you being sued for having your parked car in the street . I hope this helps .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
OK , this will be a quick run down of coverages most commonly needed but the answer may vary some form state to state : The first coverage you need is Bodily Injury Liability . This is the amount of coverage you need to protect yourself from the claims and law suits of people you injure . The second but related coverage is the Property damage coverage for property you destroy . So it is common in the US to sell them in groups such as 100/300/100 . Now what does that mean : The first number is critical . This is the per person limit of bodily injury liability . Insurers are not stupid . They know that in 75 % of all accidents , there will be one person in each vehicle -LRB- it is just the way Americans drive -RRB- So , there is a lot less likelihood of hitting that 300,000 but it would take injury to more than one person to do it . So the odds are with your insurer . Another way to buy insurance -LRB- usually about 10 % more in cost -RRB- is through Combined Single Limits coverage , CSL gives you one bulk sum to pay the claim more as the accident happened rather than based on the sub limits of your policy . So split limits are the norm , but for a little more you might want combined single limit coverage . The next coverage is usually PIP or Medical Payments . Both of these sort of compensate for usually minor events for which the party is injured and you want to take care of the injury regardless of fault . For example you give a ride to a friend who slams the door on his finger . Yes it was his fault , but it was your car and you do n't want suing you over this . Your policy responds with either medical payment or Personal Injury . PIP is usually broader and often includes wages loss which Med Pay does not . The next group of coverages are usually the most important on your policy . These are your uninsured or under-insured motorist coverage . In about 14 % of accidents the at fault party will have no insurance . And in the next grouping of the accidents you will see coverage of the at fault party at state minimums or not much more . . Now you need the protection of UM coverage . A good rule of thumb is never buy less UM than you have for Bodily Injury Liability . This is now you protecting yourself , your family and passengers in your car . It is perhaps the most little understood coverage and most important part of your policy.Lastly as respects UM/UIM you need Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist Property Damage at a level commensurate with the ACV of you car . Next come the coverages on the physical damage to your car . The coverages are Comprehensive or also called OTC or Other than Collision . which covers many perils such as theft , fire , flood , trees falling on the vehicle etc. . Collision occurs when you hit something such as a tree , a road curb , a pothole , another vehicle etc. . This is where the value of your car is a consideration . You should also select a deductible that is right for you and your household budget From here we go to many ancillary coverages including Rental Reimbursement which is usually stated as a dollar limit for thirty days -LRB- enough time usually to get your car repaired -RRB- > The coverage is triggered by another cause of loss such as collision . The next and perhaps last coverage to consider for the general public is towing or as some companies offer road side assistance . Towing is just that towing . Whereas roadside service is usually sign and drive towing , run out of gas , lock out of car etc. . Now if you have a new car you might want replacement coverage or if leased gap coverage for loan or lease . If you do n't understand any of this gives us a call , We believe an educated consumer is better for every one .
In most states automobile insurance follows a vehicle . This is the policy that will apply if you borrow the vehicle and are involved in an accident . The owner of the vehicle can allow any licensed driver to operate the vehicle . Under those circumstances the coverage on the vehicle remains in force . If the vehicle is stolen there is not any coverage . The rate charged for the automobile insurance depends , in part , on the drivers who reside where the vehicle is registered . These drivers are considered the household of the vehicle . Their claims history and motor vehicle report will be scrutinized by the insurance companys underwriters . If a driver in the household is considered to be an unsuitable risk , the insurance company may offer coverage for the car only if the unsuitable driver is excluded from the policy . Under these circumstances the owner of the vehicle has relinquished the right for that excluded driver to operate the vehicle . That driver can not borrow the car without loss of all coverage . The vehicle is insured to the limits stated in the policy . Automobile insurers provide a range of insurance limits . This fact , alone , should alert vehicle owners to the fact that sometimes a claim can exceed the limits of the policy . A recent example is a car was struck by another driver who then caromed into a third car which rolled forward and struck another car , which then rolled forward and ran over a motorcycle operator . Two people left the scene by emergency vehicles . The chances are quite good that this accident will exhaust the limits of most insurance policies . The responsible operator is liable for damages beyond the limits of the policy . If you are the casual driver of a car owned by someone else you need to understand that the coverage available is set out in the insurance policy for the automobile you are borrowing . If you are involved in an accident and the damages exceed the limit of the policy for the automobile concerned , your own insurance policy on your own automobile may provide coverage in excess of the coverage from the damaged vehicles insurance . This combination of coverages means that there is probably more coverage when you , the occasional operator , are driving then otherwise . This doesnt relieve the occasional operator from any responsibility . It would be wise to make sure that there is adequate insurance on the vehicle you are borrowing . Sometimes there is an expectation that the occasional operator is providing insurance . Worse would be the situation where you damaged the vehicle and there wasnt any physical damage coverage and the owner expects you to repair the vehicle . This could be the case if the deductible was out of reach for you . It is probably wise to discuss this with the owner of the vehicle before you borrow the car . This would be particularly true if you planned to borrow the car often or even periodically . Relationships can be damaged severely by an automobile accident . These expectations can work both ways and the occasional operator can expect that certain coverages are in place , such as medical payments , that may not be on the policy .
You can but there would have to be some reason . For example , if you reside in one state , but have a vacation home in another , and you want to avoid the wear and tear on one of your primary cars , you may want to register a car in the state in which your vacation property is located . In that case , due to states registration regulations which require proof of insurance issued in the registering state , you would obtain coverage for that car in that state .
Most states require vehicles that are registered for road use to be insured ; likewise , most states require that if a person is driving a vehicle , that they have insurance as well . Thetype of insurance that most states require you to have is liability coverage . Liability coverage is also referred to as third-party insurance . Liability insurance really does n't do anything for you ; rather , it provides coverage for injury/damage that another partyincurs that you are responsible -LRB- liable -RRB- for . If you are driving and you do n't have the state required insurance , there are several things that can happen to you . You can get cited for a violation for not having insurance andyour vehicle can get towed . If you are involved in an accident and you do not have insurance , there can be problems even if the accident is not your fault . If the accident is your fault , then there can be a lot of issues . In addition to getting cited and having your vehicle towed , you can be sued by the party you injured for their damages -LRB- damages can include property damage as well as medical expenses -RRB- . We 've had some clients that were responsible for an accident that at the time did not have auto insurance ; in addition to some of the problems listed above , they were sued and that resulted ina lien being placed on their home . Insurance laws and regulations vary from state to state , and also vary based on if you have a lien -LRB- note -RRB- on your car . I suggest contacting your professional insurance agent to review your situation to make certain youremain `` legal '' in the eyes of your state and help eliminate any potential problems that can arise .
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
Renters Insurance can not be transferred from one tenant to another tenant ; the named insured can not transfer the insurance to another person . However , if the named insured moves to a new rental location , the location can be changed by request to the Carrier 's Customer Service department in writing or online -LRB- if available -RRB- . If the named insured is moving to another State , the policy will need to be rewritten as policy forms are approved separately by each independent State thus requiring a rewrite to the new State . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States should you be unable to make a change to your current renters insurance policy based on your current situation . An exemplary online solution for all ! WEBSITELINK Should you need additional assistance , please contact a licensed professional to answer your specific questions !
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Pay For Colonoscopy Screening ?
Medicare will cover a colonoscopy screening one every 2 years if you 're considered to be at high risk for colon cancer . If your doctor accepts assignment , Medicare would cover the screening at 100 % -LRB- you pay nothing -RRB- . If your doctor does not accept assignment , then Medicare will cover 80 % of the expenses . You would be responsible for the other 20 % and the part B deductible may apply.A Medigap plan F can cover the other 20 % of expenses and part B deductible if your doctor does n't accept assignment . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medicare will cover a colonoscopy screening one every 2 years if you 're considered to be at high risk for colon cancer . If your doctor accepts assignment , Medicare would cover the screening at 100 % -LRB- you pay nothing -RRB- . If your doctor does not accept assignment , then Medicare will cover 80 % of the expenses . You would be responsible for the other 20 % and the part B deductible may apply.A Medigap plan F can cover the other 20 % of expenses and part B deductible if your doctor does n't accept assignment . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What does AFLAC ' c Cancer policy pay ? I can only give you a general idea as each policy pays out different amounts , depending on the level of coverage you purchase . With that said , AFLACs Cancer policies usually pay for : Cancer tests such as Mammographies cervical screening colonoscopies , daily hospital benefit for room and board , some cancer drugs , cancer surgical benefits , anesthesiologist , daily doctor visits while you are in the hospital , blood , plasma , radiation therapy , chemotherapy , reconstruction after surgery , daily visits to the hospital by the patients doctor , benefits for travel to a cancer center including hotel , airfare , gas for your car to get there , ambulance benefits . These are some of the main coverages , but remember that there either annual or lifetime limits as to how much AFLAC will pay , it all depends on your policy .
Medicare will pay for a colonoscopy once every 10 years for those who are not considered high risk for colon cancer . If a flexible sigmoidoscopy is performed , a colonoscopy can not be done for at least another 4 years . If a person is at high risk for colon cancer , Medicare will pay for a colonoscopy every 2 years .
Medicare Part B will cover a colonoscopy performed once every 10 years for persons of low risk -LRB- but not within 4 years after a sigmoidoscopy -RRB- . Persons at high risk for colorectal cancer can have a colonoscopy paid for by Medicare every 2 years . A Medicare Advantage Plan may cover colonoscopy more often .
Colonoscopy can be covered as a preventative benefit under the Humana plan if it is a routine procedure . If it is part of the regular preventative schedule there will be no cost to have it done . The trick however is that if anything is discovered or if a polyp is removed , it will no longer be billed as a preventative procedure and there will be a copy as a result . Most of the time it is billed as an outpatient surgery and you would need to pay the cost share applicable to it . A diagnostic Colonoscopy is going to be billed as an outpatient surgery .
Medicare will cover a colononscopy every 24 months -LRB- 2 years -RRB- if the patient is at high risk for colorectal cancer . If the patient is not high risk for colorectal cancer , Medicare will cover a colonoscopy every 120 months -LRB- 10 years -RRB- or 48 months after a flexible sigmoidoscopy .
The official name for `` ObamaCare '' is the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act -LRB- PPACA -RRB- . It is also commonly referred to as Obama care , health care reform and the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- was signed into law to reform the health care industry by President Barack Obama on March 23 , 2010 and upheld by the supreme court on On June 28 , 2012 . The goal of healthcare reform is to give more Americans access to affordable , quality health insurance and to reduce the growth in health care spending in the U.S. . The fact is healthcare reform and the newly opened exchanges do not replace private insurance , Medicare , or Medicaid . If you have health coverage you like , you can keep it . Many of the ACA 's numerous provisions have already been enacted . The rest of the program starts in 2013-2014 and continues to roll out until 2022 . Healthcare reform offers a number of new benefits , rights and protections including the requirement that all new health insurance plans cover preventive services and provide new essential health benefits , this includes everything from yearly check-ups , to maternity care , to mental health , to mammograms and colonoscopies , at no out-of-pocket costs . In addition the ACA includes provisions that let young adults stay on their plan until 26 , stop insurance companies from dropping you when you are sick or if you make an honest mistake on your application , prevent against gender discrimination , stop insurance companies from making unjustified rate hikes , do away with life-time and annual limits , and require all insurers to cover people with pre-existing conditions .
Original Medicare does not cover routine Hepatitis C screening , but it can cover screening if approved by Medicare due to signs or symptoms of Hepatitis C being present . In that case , the screening becomes diagnostic and can be covered by Medicare guidelines . Under Medicare Advantage PPO plans , routine Hepatitis C screening IS covered .
Medicare Part A will cover blood tests done as an inpatient in a hospital or skilled nursing or rehab facility , and Part B will cover blood tests done as an outpatient in any setting , when the blood tests are ordered to diagnose or monitor a condition or disease . Medicare Part A and B does not ordinarily cover routine blood screening . However , some preventative screenings have recently been added to the blood tests that are covered under Medicare part B : diabetes screening for those who are high risk for diabetes , one blood test every 5 years to test cholesterol , HIV tests for those who are high risk or pregnant , and prostate cancer screening yearly . For specifics see this brochure : WEBSITELINK
This is very unusual but not unheard of and technically legal as I understand it . In my nearly 30 years of being associated with employer 's group health plans I have had many clients who require a drug screen as a condition of employment but I have never had one that charged a prospective employee to pay for it . Do they offer to reimburse you if you pass the drug screening ? Really a drug screen should only be the last step before you are hired or you are given a conditional offer of employment based upon passing the drug screen . With today 's technology $ 300 seems an excessive amount to be charged just for a drug screening , is there a credit check and criminal background check also included in this ? Traditionally such practices have been a cost of doing business for the employer -LRB- and these tests can be required of the employer if the have Federal or State contracts they have to comply with as part of their doing business with the government -RRB- and not passed onto a job applicant . Personally , I would look for employment elsewhere before I would pay a prospective employer for the `` privilege '' of getting a job offer . If they will pick your pocket up front like that I can only imagine what a delightful work environment they must provide .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not includeHPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
Original Medicare has a list of preventive screenings that it will cover under Part B. However , the cancer screening list does not include HPV testing as a covered screening test for cervical cancer . What Medicare does cover is one PAP test and pelvic exam every 2 years if you are at average risk for cervical cancer . If you are considered at high risk and have had an abnormal PAP test in the last 3 years , Medicare will cover it once a year . The tests will be covered at 100 % if your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . If he/she does n't accept assignment , you would be responsible for any excess charges the doctor bills you for -LRB- an amount above and beyond the Medicare-approved amount , up to 15 % -RRB- - you may want to look into buying a Medicare supplement plan F or plan G to cover excess charges -LRB- plans F & G cover excess charges at 100 % -RRB- .
Medicare covers a preventive screening visit when you 're new to Medicare and yearly `` wellness '' visits . A full annual physical exam would not be covered at 100 % . The new to Medicare preventive visit can be completed one time within the first year your Part B is active and includes a review of your medical history , discussion about preventive services -LRB- e.g. certain screenings , shots , etc. -RRB- , ht/wt measurement , blood pressure check , vision test , and a BMI index check . The yearly `` wellness '' visits can be completed once every 12 months if you 've had Part B for longer than a year . The purpose of the wellness visits is to develop and monitor a plan to help prevent disease and disability based on your health . Your would complete a health risk assessment with your doctor as well . Like the welcome to Medicare preventive visit , these visits include a review of your medical history , ht/wt check , and a blood pressure check . These test are only covered at 100 % if you 're doctor accepts Medicare and accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- . Otherwise , you would be responsible for a portion of the costs -LRB- typically 20 % coinsurance -RRB- and the Part B deductible may apply -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . You can also be subject to paying for other services that are conducted during the visit if they are not covered as part of the preventive visit benefits -LRB- e.g. blood tests , urine tests , ekg , etc. -RRB- . Typically , original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- only covers about 80 % of a senior 's health care expenses , leaving the insured responsible for the other 20 % . You may want to look at supplementing your coverage with a Medigap plan -LRB- also known as a Medicare supplement plan -RRB- to cover the gaps in coverage that Medicare does n't pay for -LRB- e.g. that other 20 % -RRB- . You pay a monthly premium to get these gaps covered so you 're not hit with large bills . The resulting major advantage is it allows a senior to create a much , much more predictable health care expense structure - and when you 're on a fixed income , this is vital . Please feel free to contact me if I can be of more assistance . Thanks very much .
That is a great question ! Yes , Medicare part B covers a screening every twelve months . Eleven full months have to have elapsed between screenings . A diagnostic screening can be done anytime that it is prescribed . The Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- makes a mammogram available every one to two years for any woman over the age of 40 . They are a covered procedure by your insurer . Thanks for asking !
It really depends heavily on the homeowner carrier chosen and the type of pool , whether in-ground or above-ground . In Florida , the premium will also be affected by the presence of a screened-in pool . While the screened-in situation helps with the accidental fall peril factors on the liability side , the screen has a negative effect in terms of its vulnerability to wind damage on the property side . Security devices in and around the pool and access doors can have an affect on the pricing . Bottom line is that carriers view and rate pools differently . You really need to get some rate comparisons .
When plans renew or are effective on or after August 1 , 2012 , all of the following womens health services will be considered preventive -LRB- some were already covered -RRB- . These services generally will be covered at no cost share , when provided in network : Well-woman visits -LRB- annually and now including prenatal visits -RRB- Screening for gestational diabetes Human papillomavirus -LRB- HPV -RRB- DNA testing Counseling for sexually transmitted infections Counseling and screening for human immunodeficiency virus -LRB- HIV -RRB- Screening and counseling for interpersonal and domestic violence Breastfeeding support , supplies and counseling Generic formulary contraceptives are covered without member cost-share -LRB- for example , no copayment -RRB- . Certain religious organizations or religious employers may be exempt from offering contraceptive services . So unless youremployertakes arighteous moral stand then yes AETNA HEALTH PLANS WITHPRESCRIPTIONPLANS will .
Yes , but for certain types of sexually transmitted diseases -LRB- STDs -RRB- - this is covered under Medicare Part B . The covered screenings include tests for chlamydia , gonorrhea , syphilis , and Hepatitis B and can be done once every 12 months . If your doctor accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- , then you will not be charged for the screenings .
Medicare covers your annual exams including most women 's gynocological exams and testing . As part of your pelvic exam and pap test , your doctor should screen for abnormalities including STD 's , abnormal cells and HPV . The HPV virus has been linked to certain types of cervical cancer . You should have regular HPV screening and it is normally covered by Medicare
In South Carolina there are several medicare companies that pay to offset yuor total cost of replacing yuor glasses . Original Medicare does not . Medicare Advantage also pays for glaucoma screening and cataract surgery . I do not mean to make this sound like I am recommending that you buy a Medicare Advantage plan because I still think if your budget will allow you to stay with original medicare and have a medicare supplement it may be to your advantage because once you switch to medicare advantage and then wish you had stayed with original medicare you will have underwriting questions
end question
start question
long-term-care-insurance
What Is A Good Age To Get Long Term Care Insurance ?
There is no perfect age to get long term care insurance . However , by purchasing coverage between the ages of 40 and 55 , assuming you are in good health , you will , of course , receive much better rates than if you wait until after 60 , when your health and the price will change . A full-time broker or financial planner -LRB- NOT a marketer , radio/tv person , part-timer , or amateur -RRB- is your best resource for ACCURATE information .
Maybe one should not get long-term care insurance . Let 's start there . If an individual or a family has a sizeable estate that either is liquid or can be liquidated and be made readily available to pay for the cost of long-term care , maybe long-term care is n't needed . If , on the other extreme , you have a very small estate comprised of no real estate and very little personal property of any worth and will rely almost entirely on Social Security in retirement , you ca n't afford long-term care premiums , now or in the future . You will have to have a plan , however , in case you do need long-term care . A family discussion around the topic should be scheduled so that those that might become either temporary or permanent caregivers are fully apprised of the responsibilities and sacrifices that may have to be made . Medicaid qualification should be fully investigated and the benefits and limitations understood . People buy long-term care for roughly the same reason they buy life insurance . One buys life insurance because they care about the financial security of those that are left behind . One buys long-term care insurancebecause they care about those that might have to take care of them if they ca n't take care of themselves . Long-term care costs are not covered by conventional health insurance , Medicare , and most Medicare supplement insurance . They can be very expensive , especially ifthe elderly person lives a long-period of time in a state of incapacity . Caregivers will be spouses and adult children are likely to be caregivers whether one owns long-term care insurance or not . Long-term care insurance is for caregivers . It gives them choices about the quality of care that can be afforded and whether they can be relieved of some of the responsibility for caregiving . Many elderly spouses of those that ca n't take care of themselves become disabled themselves because of the emotional and psychological energy expended in caregiving . Adult children sometimes get caught in a conflict over eldercare and parenting growing children . Long-term care insurance provides income-tax-free money to hire trained individuals to care for loved ones . Ultimately , it allows the insured to die with dignity and peace . Getting back to the wealthy that do n't need to buy long-term care insurance , guess what ? Many wealthy couples and individuals do . They understand leverage : paying smaller dollars now for larger dollars later , if needed . They also understand that in many situations , premiums for long-term care may be tax-deductible . What about the middle class ? They would have to design their coverage to help offset the cost of long-term care . No matter how much one spends , no long-term care insurance policy can guarantee to cover all possible long-term care expenses . But , the average claim is about 24 - 26 months . Buying a long-term care policy with a pool of money sufficient to cover at least part of those costs would be prudent . Is buying a basic plan for long-term care that would pay only half of one 's long-term care costs be a bad deal ? I do n't think anyone that 's paying $ 400/day for facility care and being reimbursed for $ 200/day would find that of no value .
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
Roughly sixty percent of Americans will require long term care services sometime during their lifetime . This is not exclusively a problem for the elderly as younger people can require this type of care some times . This level of care includes a range of services including skilled and custodial care that is provided over a long period of time . These requirements come from chronic sickness or injury , cognitive impairment and physical disability . Hospitals provide acute care . Medical care given over a long period of time for chronic conditions is where the need for long term care arises . Sometimes custodial care is required because the patient has lost the ability to do one of the recognized activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living . Most of the long term care given in the US is given by family members . However , there are many situations where family members can not provide necessary care . Professional and non-professionals can provide aid and assistance to these people . This long term care can be given in the home of the patient or in a variety of institutional settings . Long term care can be given in day-care facilities , nursing homes , and assisted living facilities . On average men need more than two years of long term care while women need almost four years on average ? The leading causes for patients requiring long term care are dementia , arthritis , cancer , stroke and nervous conditions . Caring for a patient in a home setting can cost up to $ 150,000 per year . The cost for a nursing home bed is about $ 75,000 per year -LRB- this varies by location . -RRB- There are basically four ways to finance long term care . The family can take the expense out of their own pocket , they can look to government programs -LRB- if they qualify , -RRB- they can use long term care insurance or they can rely upon charity . For a variety of reasons long term care insurance has provided a solution for many people . LTC insurance provides predictability for an otherwise unpredictable risk . It has become such popular coverage and policyholders have been so reluctant to drop their coverage that the benefits have started exceeding the premiums . It is quite popular among wealthy policyholders . Many companies that offered coverage have withdrawn and others have been forced to raise their premiums . This adjustment seems to be complete now . There are various forms of LTC coverage . Policies different widely . It is rather difficult to compare but is worth the effort . When deciding on a policy the first thing to establish is the amount of coverage you want and the period of time you want coverage . The second consideration is how soon after the start of long term care will you want the policy to start paying . This waiting period is computed in several ways so care must be exercised to make sure you are making a fair comparison . Not all policies use the same events to trigger benefits so care should be taken in this area as well . This can be a very technical area so compare your situation with the policy requirements . How a policy pays out will vary according to the policy . Some policies provide for reimbursement of expenses , others use an indemnity form which pays up to a specific limit of expenses incurred on each specific day , and some are on a cash model which pays a maximum benefit regardless of the actual cost of the care that is being given . Long term care insurance is a way to protect assets . The alternatives deplete assets with the government programs requiring a person to be in poverty .
A better question would be `` Who Should n't Buy Long-term Care Insurance '' ? Thats simpler to answer . The following people should NOT buy long term care insurance : 1 . Those that can not afford the premium on even a base policy . 2 . Those that have virtually no assets to pass on to the next generationand will need every available dollar saved for retirement . 3 . Those that will have to work until they die for lack of savings and insufficient Social Security payments or private pension . 4 . Those that can not medically qualify . 5 . Those that are already unable to perform regular daily activities of living without assistance . People in those conditions may qualify for the payment of long-term care through Medicaid -LRB- MediCal in California -RRB- if they come to a point in their life where they need care and ca n't afford it . If the above conditions describe you in any way , you should be sitting down with your adult children or closest relatives and coming up with a plan of action should you be unable to take care of yourself . Everyone else should consider buying some long-term care insurance through an agent or agency that either specializes or has a specialist that is experienced in handling long-term care insurance casework . Having some amount of insurance is better than having none . When one qualifies to receive payments from the insurance company for long-term care , they are usually near the end of their life . The average long-term care claim is approximately 2 - 2.5 years . For those that need care longer than that , virtually all but the most unusual claims are paid out after 5 years . Families with a history of late-life mental illness -LRB- dementia or Alzheimers -RRB- should consider buying a larger pool of money than others , if they can afford it . It is in the best interest of the adult children to help out with long-term care premium payments if the elderly parents can not afford to pay all of the costs . Long-term care is an emotional , psychological , sociological , and family problem as much as it is financial . For the dignity of those who need care and the people or person most likely to be the caregiver , there needs to be a plan of action determined and long-term care insurance should be a part of that plan if it can be afforded and the person is medically qualified . Long-term care insurance is best purchased when young . Premiums can and will go up during the life of the policy if all the bells and whistles are included in the design of the coverage . But , those increases will seem like pocket-change if one needs long-term care . $ 80,000 per year is not unusual for facility care today . 24/7 home care can exceed $ 20,000 per month ! With family help , home care costs can be kept down . But , if facility care is required , there 's not much that can be done about avoiding high costs . Long-term care costs vary by place . The left - and right-hand coasts are the most expensive . Relocation may be necessary to get affordable care in a quality facility .
70 % of people who are 65 years old will need to use some type of long term care in their lifetime . And , as they age the likelihood of needing long term care will increase . The cost for this care is very expensive and it is not covered by conventional health insurance - commercial carriers or Medicare . This is because our health care system is geared to acute care not long term care . According to the 2015 Genworth survey the national average cost for a semi-private room in a nursing home is about $ 80,000 . More , for a private room . Home Health care costs average $ 20/hour . These expense arise when most people are living on a fixed income with little room for added expenses . Especially , unplanned ones . Baby boomers have not been great at planning for retirement . One year of long term care can ruin someone 's retirement plans . This is what happens in many cases ; families deplete their assets and end up qualifying for Medicaid -LRB- aka Welfare -RRB- to pay for long term care expenses . The question people need to ask themselves is when the need for long term care arises , will they have the money to pay for this care ? This is what long term care insurance can do for them . Insurance is the only financial vehicle that promises a specific amount of money at a point in time . There is no other . Even though this can be an expensive premium , depending on the age at which the policy is purchased , compared to the benefits paid , it is worth the outlay for most people . Not only because it will help pay the bills . Long term care insurance policies offer additional benefits that most people are unaware of . Most importantly , all carriers offer optional care management to assist with the difficult decisions about care , choosing facilities and offering discounts on major providers of care . Many times families need someone to discuss options with who is educated about all the options available and is n't emotionally involved with their situation . This is where the care manager can be of tremendous help and the family does not have to go to the expense of hiring a geriatric care manager . The policies will also pay for modifications to be made to the home to keep the person at home rather than moving them to a nursing home .
What age is considered young for long term care insurance ? When you turn age 50 , youll more than likely receive an invitation to join AARP . Most advisers start addressing long term care needs at age 50 as part of their retirement strategy for their clients . But age 60 seems to be the age where long term care becomes a serious consideration . But if your family has a predisposition to disease or a geriatric history of nursing home care , you may not want to wait until age 50 . When youre young and healthy , long term care insurance is relatively inexpensive . If your family fits this profile , you should investigate long term care even if youre age 40 .
Whether long-term care insurance should be `` mandated '' requires an associated question : `` Mandated by whom ? '' Also , any question that includes the word `` should '' involves a question of values and may fall into a political category of some kind.The question , however , is a good one . We have a looming crisis that has only just begun . Millions of people will soon be at the age of possibly needing extended care before they pass away . The current `` baby boom '' demographic has hit retirement age and is about 20-30 years from cresting at an age that many may need care before dying . Unless there are many medical advances , care accommodations , and/or technological improvements for elder care , hundreds of thousands of people in their 70s , 80s , and 90s and beyond will need assistance in successfully performing the activities of day-to-day life , such as feeding oneself , getting from one place to another , dressing , bathing , etc.Who is going to provide that care ? First , it will be family -LRB- spouse and/or adult children , if available -RRB- , but beyond that , there is only Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- to provide care services . The problem is that one must become `` indigent '' to qualify for government aid , and one must be admitted to an approved facility to receive care . -LRB- Medicare currently only provides hospital , recovery , and skilled nursing care for a maximum period of 100 days . A hospital stay for a minimum of three days is required to qualify in most cases . -RRB- If the questioner is asking should the government be mandated to provide long-term care , then this is entirely a political question . The government , ultimately , is the tax-payer . Congress is the body of our government that legislates laws.If the questioner is asking should everyone be mandated to purchase their own long-term care coverage , the answer is probably `` no '' . Even though that might seem like a solution , the cost of privately-owned long-term care is currently far beyond the reach of many Americans . Some could not even afford the premiums of a base policy which would n't come close to paying what long-term care might end up costing.A commission formed by Congress is currently meeting to debate and hear testimony on the question of how we , as a society , will handle those that have no family or other support group , do not own long-term care insurance , and are `` taking too long to die '' . This makes the question a moral one , and one that deserves an answer so that people may die with dignity .
If you have family history that has reoccurring nursing home care or home care assistance , you may need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . If you play the morbidity odds of geriatric living , youll need long term care insurance . If you generated extended care expenses that you can not financially cover , you need long term care insurance . A male and a female age 60 , nonsmoker and in good health with a full coverage and inflation rider from a quality long term care insurance company will pay around $ 300 a month for the max coverage .
Not everyone needs long term care insurance . LTCI is not for persons who are struggling to meet their day to day living expenses , rent an apartment , and have little savings and no investments . If such a person needed to go to a nursing home , Medicaid will almost immediately start picking up their tab and they will be fine . Long term care insurance is for those who have substantial assets or income that they do n't want to `` lose '' by paying high long term care costs . Some people are OK with their savings going to long term care expenses , if needed . They figure that is why they saved . Others feel strongly that they want to pass that wealth to heirs to continue a business , care for a disabled adult child , or help grandchildren go to college , among a myriad of other reasons . It is this latter segment of the population that `` needs '' long term care insurance , especially if they are not so very wealthy that paying nursing home expenses for many years would simply dent their resources , rather than deplete them . If they can afford long term care insurance , but would not be able to to pay for long term care services , people who are adamant about choosing the type of care they receive , or persons who are setting up a plan so that their children do n't have to worry about it , also could use long term care insurance . As long as Medicaid is around , no one absolutely needs long term care insurance . But for all the reasons above , many people would consider it a need if they looked at it realistically .
What 's the best age to buy Long Term Care Insurance ? There are many opinions as to the answer for that question , offered by professionals in the insurance field and in by professionals in the field of issues related to aging . As someone who has a background in both fields , I think the best age to purchase Long Term Care Insurance is by age 60 . Rates are lower and you are less likely to have a medical condition to disqualify you than if you wait longer than that . Some cite statistics that over 40 % of Long Term Care is provided to persons under age 65 , so you should purchase LTC coverage at a much younger age . But many of the younger persons in extended care facilities have mental illness or other lifelong conditions that would not have qualified them for LTC insurance in the first place . It is certainly true that the younger you are , the lower the rates , but you do have to offset the extra years for which you will be making those payments . More important than that , I believe , is getting the policy while you still qualify . If you see some health conditions sneaking up on you at age 40 that could be trouble at age 60 , get your Long Term Care coverage while you can .
The reason people buy Long Term Care Insurance is so that they have the resources to pay for home health care , assisted living care , nursing home care , or some other types of care that are needed if they are unable to take care of themselves independently . Some people with large estates get Long Term Care insurance because they do not want all their hard earned money or property go to paying a nursing home . Rates of $ 100,000 per year are not uncommon for skilled nursing care . In order to qualify for Medicaid to pay these expenses , resources must be spent down to almost nothing -LRB- if a spouse is at home , the spouse does get to keep half of the couple 's resources -RRB- . So having Long Term Care insurance to pay for these costs both helps preserve the estate and assists the spouse left at home , if applicable . One aspect of Long Term Care insurance that is not always considered is the freedom of choice that is offered to persons who carry insurance to cover chronic care expenses . If they have the right type of coverage , they can pay a relative to come live with them or choose home health care , if that works . If they must go to a nursing home , they have more choice in the facility they want to live in , versus having to go with the room arrangements or facilities that only Medicaid will cover . This is not to say that Long Term Care Insurance is for everyone . If you have very few resources and are already on Medicaid , or anticipate getting Medicaid benefits in the future , there is no need to purchase Long Term Care Insurance . And if you need to dip into grocery money , forego medical care , or lead a poor quality of life to pay for LTC insurance , that is not worth it . Consulting with agencies that can shop for these policies to get you the best rate , and also guide you through the decision whether and what to buy LTC insurance , is a great place to start .
Asset Based Long Term Care provides a unique solution to providing for the expense of long term care while at the same time providing other benefits . Generally , it is provided with a base of life insurance or an annuity . One of the problems with traditional Long Term Care Insurance is affordability . Also the underwriting is very strict . Because Asset Based Long Term Care is underwritten much like a life insurance policy , it is usually easier to qualify . Many traditional Long Term Care policies are use it or lose it , although many policies do have return of premium provisions . With Asset Based Long Term care written with a life insurance chassis , if you do not use the long term care provision , you beneficiaries will receive the death benefit , as in a traditional life insurance policy . If the plan is Annuity based , you receive the interest and tax advantages of an annuity , but the flexibility of utilizing the funds for long term care should you need it . While most of these hybrid products are not as comprehensive as traditional long term care they can be a great alternative depending on the goals and personal situation of the client .
Long Term Health Care Insurance is called , simply , Long Term Care Insurance . It covers the cost of living in a nursing home , assisted living home , or receiving other types of services when the insured person is unable to take care of themselves . Among those who should buy Long Term Care Insurance are those who have many assets and feel strongly that they do not want their assets to go toward paying long term care expenses . People who want to have many choices in how and where they are cared for , should they be unable to care for themselves , are also people who would benefit from Long Term Care insurance , if they can afford it . Finally , persons whose families want the security of knowing that their parents will not rely on them for long term care , if needed , are those who should considering buying Long Term Care insurance .
Who really needs long term care insurance ? EVERYBODY . The question really is who can afford long term care insurance ? What long term care insurance does for a person is create a pool of money to purchase the quality of care they want , rather than what they have to settlefor . All long term care insurance does is pay for better care and nicer facilities to reside in or home health care . When you do n't carry a long term care policy and have used up yourassets , you can still get care , covered by thegovernment , cept your say in the quality of care you receiveno longermatters . With the government having to find ways tomake budgets work , caringfor the elderly tends to slip down in priority funding wise .
First of all , there is no federal long-term care program . If a person is or becomes `` indigent '' by state standards , they may qualify to have their long-term care facility expenses paid for by Medicaid -LRB- Medical in CA -RRB- . There is a commission in Washington currently debating if there will be a federal long-term care program , but they will have no power to institute one and it 's doubtful that given our current budget deficit , a comprehensive program could be afforded by either the states or the feds -LRB- Medicaid is a jointly funded and administered medical program for the poor -RRB- . Private long-term care programs at this point in time consist of applying to an insurance company and going through full underwriting to determine insurability . If so , they are issued a long-term care policy of insurance . Only insurance agents that are certified to sell long term care -LRB- most states -RRB- can do so . There is a Partnership long-term care program in 36 states -LRB- plus charter Partnership programs still going in CA , CT , NY , and IN -RRB- . The state departments of health `` partner '' with the person with a Partnership-approved long-term care plan of insurance so that if they blow through the insurance policy maximum benefits and are still alive , the amount of the payout from the insurance company will increase the impoverishment threshold dollar-for-dollar for that person and if the insured 's personal non-exempt assets are lower than what the insurance company has paid out , Medicaid will take over payment of the person 's long-term care costs until s/he dies.Note that there are some limitations1 . The person needs to be in a facility for full payment of costs by Medicaid . -LRB- Home care reimbursement from Medicaid is under $ 300/mo . -RRB- 2 . A lien in the amount of money paid out by Medicaid is levied against the patient 's estate . -LRB- This is currently being debated and is a point of contention with some states and consumer groups . Whether it will actually be done is not certain , but it 's `` on the books '' . -RRB- 3 . While there is a promise that no discrimination will be made between `` Medicaid patients '' and `` paying patients '' in nursing facilities , audits of some facilities have found that there are , in fact , `` Medicaid rooms '' and regular rooms . When discovered , those facilities are supposedly ordered to make no distinction in treatment , care , or placement of patients based on their ability to pay.At this time , it is clear that there is a looming problem of how to take care of the elderly of the boomer generation as that demographic bubble passes through old age . And , though medical technology allows people to live longer , that life is not necessarily better . No solution has yet been proposed at the federal level . The problem will fall to Medicaid for now . Recent surveys have shown that only about 7-8 % of the population owns its own long-term care insurance . Some calculations indicate that Medicaid is solvent for only another 8-10 years as currently administered .
Knowing what life insurance term you should get is something you can best discern for yourself , when you understand how term life insurance is priced . When you purchase a term life insurance policy , you are usually locking in the premium so that it will not go up for a certain number of years . This can be as short as one year or as long as 30 + years . When you choose a longer term , you will find the price is much higher than the premium for a shorter term . That is because the policy is covering a greater risk as you get older . E.g. . If you are age 40 now and take out a 10 year term policy , that policy is only covering you to age 50 . If you take out a 30 year term policy , it is covering you to age 70 . The chance of your dying at age 70 is much greater than at age 50 . And life insurance costs are higher where there is greater risk of death . Term policies roughly average out the cost of insurance for each year you have the policy , and charge you that same price for the entire term . So in the first years of the policy , you are paying more than a person your age would be paying for that risk . In the latter years , you are paying less than a person that age would normally be paying . The advantage to longer terms really shows up when health is taken into account . You may have no trouble getting a preferred rating at age 40 . But to get rated preferred at age 50 or 60 is not as likely . Therefore , having a preferred rating locked in for 30 years offers a huge price advantage to the poor soul who gets rated preferred for a 10 year term policy at age 40 , standard at age 50 , and table 4 at age 60 . Getting longer terms is not for everyone . If you definitely only have a short term need , there is no reason to pay the higher cost of a longer term policy . But IF there is a chance you may need longer coverage , as you can see , locking it in while you are healthy is never a bad idea .
The average cost of long-term care insurance depends on a number of factors as the policies are very customizable . If you 're looking for a more basic option , I would estimate a range of around $ 1,800 - $ 2,300 per year in premiums . If you want something more comprehensive , you 're probably looking at something more so in the range of $ 4,000 - $ 6,000 per year . The most comprehensive plans can be $ 7,000 or more per year . Factors such as the person 's age , health , only applying as an individual , applying as a married couple , daily benefit levels , benefit periods , compound inflation options , elimination/waiting periods , and other items will really impact what the cost for a plan will be . In today 's world , there 's a very good chance you will need long-term care at some point in your life . If you were paying for long-term care out of pocket , you can expect to be writing a check for at least $ 40,000 per year - something more specialized like a nursing home , then possibly well over $ 100,000 per year . Unfortunately , not too many people can write that check . While writing a check for several thousand dollars a year in premiums for long-term care coverage can have a bit of sticker shock , it can potentially save you 10 's of thousands of dollars in the future if it happens to you . So the idea of the coverage is to transfer the risk to the insurance company in exchange for a small premium and use their money rather than your own to pay for the expenses if that care is ever needed . The long and short being that the `` average cost '' is an irrelevant figure . It only gives you an idea . The actual cost you can expect to pay depends on your needs and what you want to accomplish with the coverage . From there you can start to compare numbers . I would suggest speaking with an independent insurance agent who works with long-term care insurance products and can compare multiple companies for you . An agent can help you sort through all the zigs and zags of long-term care insurance and help determine what coverage will best serve your needs . If you need help with your coverage , please feel free to call or e-mail me via the contact me button - I have an agent in my group with a strong background in long-term care insurance . I hope the information is helpful - please let me know if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
The bottom-line response to this question is `` the long-term care insurance that is in force when you are no longer able to take care of 2 of 6 activities of daily living or are diagnosed with an organic cognitive impairment like Alzheimer 's disease . '' However , the question is an important one and deserves elaboration.The consumer ultimately has to decide what the best long-term care insurance is for them . That requires a sometimes annoying learning curve to find out how the policy works , what the benefits , features , and riders are , and whether one can afford to purchase any kind of long-term care insurance at all.Long-term care insurance is complicated because the issue it addresses is complicated . The risk is that one has about a 1 in 6 chance of needing the help of someone else to bathe , dress , get to a restroom -LRB- in time -RRB- , move from one place to another , be able to eat and/or drink food sufficient for one 's well-being , take Rx medication in the proper dosage at the proper time among other basic daily activities over an extended period of time . These `` ADLs '' or , activities of daily living , are formally defined in a long-term care insurance policy.Clearly , there is a lot of subjective judgment regarding these ADLs and people are often skeptical about who will have the ultimate decision for eligibility to go on claim . Therefore , obtain a `` specimen policy '' from your agent and read it over carefully because that is what you are considering buying - not glossy marketing materials , not agent summaries and simplifications , and certainly not the illustration that might be initially provided for discussion purposes . The insurance contract is a legal document and constitutes the promise of the carrier to the policyowner . If you do n't understand how it works , and you do n't get satisfactory and intelligible explanations from an insurance professional - either the agent , or a carrier representative at the insurance company 's home office - do n't buy it . Here are some general guidelines of the best long-term care policy as represented by contract language : 1 . The definitions section is easy to understand and written in language that does not use technical jargon ; 2 . The section on claims clearly indicates how one can receive benefits3 . There are specifically stated services that the carrier provides at the time of claim to help the insured find qualified and/or skilled nurses for home care and quality-rated facilities should full 24/7 care be needed . This section of the document must include the words `` care coordinator '' and `` plan of care '' .4 . Customer service contact information is prominently displayed in bold type in a font large enough to be easily read by the elderly and is found in several locations in the policy .5 . Contract language allows for the possibility of medical and technical advances in care and medicine for coverage , even though it does not now exist or is not definable at this time .6 . Exclusions are concise and easily understood.The best long-term care insurance is the kind that you understand . It takes a while to figure it out , but this type of insurance could be the difference in your dying alone with no -LRB- or poor -RRB- care while still alive , or dying with dignity with quality care from people that know what they are doing and have the certification and skills to treat you . Take the time and make the effort to be an informed applicant .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Life Insurance Permitted In Islam ?
There are many who believe that due to its use of chance and interest , insurance is haram or sinful . Due to the spiritual nature of this question , it is one best answered by seeking the advise of an imam . The imam would best be able to guide you to the correct answer regarding Islam 's position on insurance .
Do to its use of interest and chance there are those who believe that insurance is not permitted in Islam -LRB- i.e. that it is haram or sinful -RRB- . Due to the spiritual nature of this question , you should seek the advice of an Imam for further guidance on Islam 's position on insurance .
Due to all insurance products use of interest and chance there are those within the Islamic faith who believe that it is haram or sinful . Due to the spiritual nature of this question , you are best advised to seek the advice of an Imam who can better guide you on Islam 's position regarding term life insurance and other forms of insurance .
Due to its use of chance and interest , there is some debate within Islam about whether or not insurance is haram or sinful . Based on the spiritual nature of this question , you are best seeking advice on this question from an Imam who can better guide you on your faith 's specific position on insurance .
There are many who believe that due to its use of chance and interest , insurance is haram or sinful . Due to the spiritual nature of this question , it is one best answered by seeking the advise of an imam . The imam would best be able to guide you to the correct answer regarding Islam 's position on insurance .
Many scholars find insurance unfair . Since there is n't a guaranteed return it has the appearance of gambling . When living in a non-Islamic country , abiding by local law is permissable . In Muslim-majority countries there are alternative companies formed called takaful that provide similar coverages on a shared-risk model .
Yes , you can get car insurance with a learner 's permit or a school and work permit . The public interest is served by having all driver 's have auto insurance , so state insurance commissions do n't look too favorably on insurance companies if they refuse to insure permitted drivers . If you are under 18 you will likely need a parent on the policy with you as you are too young to sign a contract , but that is the only issue I have ever seen with a permit . Let me know if you have more questions .
The easy answer for this would be `` Anyone you give permission to drive your vehicle . '' The exception to this would be anyone who is specifically excluded from your insurance policy . For example , a client of mine has a 17 year old son . Their son had a valid learners permit and went through the process of completing Drivers Ed , but never took the final exam and was never issued a license . Even though his permit has expired , based on his age and the fact that he had a permit , I recommended to my client they included him on their policy , but list him as an excluded driver . Because he is excluded , the insurance company does not rate him on the policy , and the premium did not increase . Outside of their son , anyone they give permission to drive their car would be covered , even if the person who borrowed the vehicle did not have their own insurance policy . You do run the risk of increased monthly premium payments should an uninsured driver borrow your car with your permission and be involved in an accident where they are liable however . So be careful of who and how often you do lend your vehicle out .
Because , under the right circumstances and with the right carrier , you can outperform whole life 's growth by buying universal life . Universal is tied to certain market activity , which can permit additional growth over the carriers general fund . However , in down markets , it permits loss , which can actually cause an increase in the premium . There is , however , an easy way to prevent any such loss . Buy Indexed universal life . It provides a slight decrease in the market 's appreciation in exchange for a guarantee that you will never lose money when the market drops . Your funds are locked in annually . Talk with your agent . Thank you . GARY LANE .
I have a hard time imaging how backdating a car insurance policy could ever be good for the insurance carrier so , all the carriers I am familiar with refuse and prohibit backdating . I can think of a couple of reasons it is desirable to backdate insurance from the customer point of view : 1 -RRB- To be able to prove insurance to a regulatory or financial entity on a certain prior date when coverage was not maintained . 2 -RRB- To be able to obtain coverage for a loss and avoid out of pocket expenses on a certain prior date when no coverage existed . Most carriers carefully underwrite the reason why any date but the present date is installed on an application for insurance . It is often also true that state law makes it illegal for an agent to backdate coverage . It does n't matter if it is car insurance , home insurance , or even life insurance , backdating is a bad idea for the insurer and the agency or agent . On this point , however , there are companies in the life insurance portion of my business that will permit backdating to save age . They wo n't accept this provision if the insured is not healthy or there are health events that create concern in the period of time back to the prior birth date . If you are not healthy now , they wo n't issue the coverage . Then , if they agree , all the premium back to the prior date will need to be paid but , the customer will enjoy a permanently lower rate based upon the prior age so this is the only time I am aware of when backdating - and I use the term very loosely here - is permitted on a written insurance policy . On car insurance , no backdating method I know of exists for all the reasons I have written -LRB- and some I have n't -RRB- .
Each carrier is different but I have found that the most common practice is that a driver with a learner 's permit is not added to an auto policy until they are actually licensed . Coverage under a relative 's policy would extend to the driver with a permit in the event of a claim .
Many carriers will issue a homeowner policy form to cover a home construction project when it is new construction . You may also use a `` builders risk '' dwelling policy form when a homeowner policy is n't permitted . Most carriers offer one option or the other . If a homeowner policy is used the `` vacancy an unoccupancy '' provisions can not be enforced during construction or renovation . Make sure to ask these questions of your agent or carrier to make sure coverage applies while under construction . You should also control the insurance and you should not insure the builder in that process . The primary issue here is one of what we refer to as `` insurable interest '' . Quite simply , you have the most to lose in a loss of the home and as a consequence you need to buy insurance to protect both your property interest and provide the lender with protection for the collateral -LRB- your dwelling -RRB- used in the loan . The building or contractor may have an interest in installed materials up to the point they make a draw for the installations , but their interest ends at that point because they do n't have an ownership position in the home . They can purchase `` installation '' coverage in their insurance package that will protect them for the value of their work installed and it is not expensive coverage so they should have this already . Do not agree to assume responsibility for their liability either . If it is their construction site , it is their responsibility to maintain as best as possible to minimize the potential liability exposures . That said , you should make sure to purchase and maintain personal liability for the property too for any potential risk of loss that would be excluded by the building in the site management . Alternately , some carriers will amend current policies to add the new address for liability and then you would n't need to have this coverage added to your builders risk coverage . By the way , the dwelling policy form permits -LRB- in many instances -RRB- the addition of endorsements that provide coverage for the value of material delivery to the site that you might have purchased . These building materials are subject to theft and it is a good idea to know if the builder or you are responsible for materials delivered to the site . Also , a dwelling policy should be created to the new total value of the improvements and original structure on either a replacement cost or actual cash value basis . I suggest replacement cost . Insurance to value is important even on this type of policy . Carriers using the dwelling form of coverage will pro-rate valuation to an average state of completion for premium calculation , but valuation at the time of loss is also tricky so keep good records so you can rebuild the entire structure after a major loss . Cleaning up the concepts here also makes it necessary to make sure that the contractor has general liability and workers compensation insurance . If they have vehicles that operate on the property you should also insist that they provide evidence of vehicle insurance . In every instance above , you should be listed as an `` additional insured '' and `` certificate holder '' during the performance of the construction tasks . If possible , ask them to waive subrogation . Get evidence in writing . A commonly used form is the `` Acord 25 '' Certification of Liability Insurance form and this is commonly provided ask for and get written evidence of coverage as noted above .
Anyone who meets their state 's requirements to hold a life insurance license and gets appointed with at least one life insurer can sell life insurance . The question becomes : Can one have a practice in accounting while selling life insurance ? In many states , the answer is yes . Some states do not permit accounting or legal professionals to be active while also selling life insurance . You can be a CPA , not be active in accounting and sell life insurance .
In Canada , life insurance premiums can be partially deductible by a corporation if a lender requires life insurance on a loan . The potion that is deductible is the `` Net Cost of Pure Insurance '' which is calculated based on a table provided by the government . Theoretically , cash value life insurance can be registered as RRSP 's with the savings portion being deductible In practice companies do not permit the registration . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
What type of life insurance you get depends on what you want the life insurance for and for how long you want / need the coverage . An independent life insurance broker who represents several companies can help you find the right policy at the right price . Here is overview to get you started : Term is insurance is initially the most inexpensive type of coverage . The premiums rise at the end of each term and the policy has an expiry date . Conversion to permanent insurance is usually permitted before a stated age -LRB- check contract for details -RRB- , Best for short term needs . Whole life is permanent coverage and usually has a guaranteed level premium . The policy 's death benefit could be designed to rise in value , In addition there could be a significant build up of cash value . This type of policy has long term applications in financial , retirement and estate planning . Since the premium is level , it is initially higher than term coverage for the same amount . If cost is a concern a combination of whole life and term can often be an alternative . Universal life can provide permanent insurance coverage . I say can be because it is essentially a whole life policy `` unbundled '' where you control the amount of premium and the investment options . This flexibility is a double edge sword . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me . If you would like to work with a local life insurance broker , you could start with a Google search . For example , if you search for : life insurance broker Halifax or life insurance agent Halifax , my name , along with several others , will come up . You can use the same method to find a life insurance broker in your community .
You can not claim life insurance as a deduction nor can you contribute to life insurance with pretax contributions . There are a few qualified defined benefit contribution plans that permit a portion of your annual contribution to fund life insurance , i.e. whole life 49.5 % and universal life 25 % .
Product suitability is always a consideration when considering product lines that have such diverse application . Life insurance is generally purchased for indemnification or inheritance planning , but can be used as supplemental retirement income . Term life insurance is an excellent for temporary coverage for temporary financial exposure to your beneficiaries . For permanent liabilities , many planners use guaranteed universal life insurance . For supplemental retirement income there are several crediting methods : for interest rate crediting you can use participating whole life or current assumption universal life . If you desire access to domestic and/or foreign indices , you should review indexed universal life insurance . If your risk tolerance permits , you could consider variable universal life with access to separate sub accounts that use marker equities and bond instruments .
Do not look at life insurance as an investment . First and foremost , the objective is to provide a death benefit at a competitive , level premium . The cash value is a secondary feature which permits a level premium for life . The internal rate of return on the cash value can be projected based on current assumptions and should compare favorably to other long term savings products so i can make sense on this basis . Life insurance offers protection , income replacement , and the chance to leave a legacy . With life insurance , you are protecting the people you care about the most . Life insurance can also protect the business you own .
Yes , you can do a Section 1035 exchange from a life insurance contract to an annuity , just not the other way around . Section 1035 permits the policy owner to trade certain kinds of contracts for another on a tax-free basis . The following types of exchanges are allowed under Section 1035 : Life contract for life contract Life contract for annuity contract Life contract for endowment contract Annuity contract for annuity contract Endowment contract for endowment contract Since 2010 , it is also possible to exchange a life , annuity , or endowment contract for a long-term care contract or exchange one long-term care contract for another long-term care contract .
An IRA is a qualified defined contribution plan under ERISA and permits many investment and savings products as funding vehicles . But life insurance is not one of them . Surprisingly , other qualified plans allow limited use of participating whole life insurance and universal life insurance as part of the annual contributions .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Why Do Republicans Want To Cut Medicare ?
Cuts to Medicare can be shared by both parties . Medicare is a boondoggle created by LBJ and never designed to be self supporting . For the last few years Medicare has paid out more than it takes in which means the future is cloudy . Obamacare , a plan designed and passed into law without a single Republican vote strips over $ 700 billion from Medicare funding .
Cuts to Medicare can be shared by both parties . Medicare is a boondoggle created by LBJ and never designed to be self supporting . For the last few years Medicare has paid out more than it takes in which means the future is cloudy . Obamacare , a plan designed and passed into law without a single Republican vote strips over $ 700 billion from Medicare funding .
Where in the world did the questioner get this idea ? Any cursory check of the historical voting record of Republicans in Congress will demonstrate that they have been very supportive of this program . Let 's see , who came up with the Medicare Part D prescription drug program ? Oh , yes , President George Bush , not exactly known for being a Democratic party member now was he ? What many Republicans have been pointing out and trying to address is the fact that the Medicare program as it is currently constituted is financially unsustainable and that changes are needed to assure the program is there for the wave of retirees who will be moving onto Medicare in the years ahead . It is the democrat party that responds to any attempts to address the problem withhysteria and demagoguery -LRB- the commercial of a Paul Ryan look alike pushing an elderly lady in a wheel chair over a cliff is a recent example -RRB- . The questioner should also be aware that ObamaCare will transfer $ 700 billion over the next decadein what would have been increased spending for Medicare to help fund the Affordable Care Act 's provisions for those under age 65 . Perhaps you should ask why are the democrats wanting to harm Medicare ?
I do not believe that Republicans -LRB- or Democrats -RRB- hate Medicare . Both parties -LRB- I hope -RRB- want to save Medicare so that it will be available for many many more years . Unless certain changes are made , Medicare , as we know it now , is at risk . It is true that both parties differ in how we will solve this problem , but as an experienced impartial broker with more than 30 years of experience , I do not believe that Republicans hate Medicare .
Republicans are overwhelmingly in favor of protecting Medicare and ensuring it is available for many additional generations . And Democrats feel the same way . Republicans seem more willing to accept the belief that Medicare needs to be tweaked in order to maintaincontinuousand effective coverage in the future . Their view on Medicare Advantage plans also seems to be different than many of their counterparts . But in fairness , bothpartiesseemcommittedto saving Medicare benefits for everyone 's future . Their methods are a bit different , but there is still plenty of common ground that should allow both parties to effectively work together .
Obviously that will depend upon who the next President is . Your question probably assumes a Republican President being elected and the current Republican control of the House and Senate continuing after the 2016 elections . A possible outcome that is a distinct possibility . Now , ask yourself , `` How many Federal laws have I seen totally repealed in my lifetime ? '' I think most people would be hard pressed to name any and this is because it is relatively rare . A new entitlement system that already has several million people involved in it has been created as has a new bureaucracy to administer it . These are hard to end . The next President will inherit these `` facts on the ground '' when they take office regardless of their political persuasion . Even a Republican seen as having a clear electoral mandate to end Obamacare will be faced with the daunting political , social and , unfortunately , racial challenges that would be associated with unwinding such an enormous program . A type of political courage that has not been demonstrated in Washington in quite some time would be required to push through a total repeal . And , then there are the uncomfortable questions that have to be faced . 1 -RRB- Do we truly want to go back to the way things were in health insurance before ObamaCare ? -LRB- for example , should pre-existing condition exclusions be allowed to return ? -RRB- and , 2 -RRB- If not , what would we keep and what would we remove from ObamaCare to `` fix '' it ? This is purely opinion , but , looking at the practical challenges involved and the fact that ObamaCare is already injected into the health insurance/healthcare system now , the path of least resistance will be the `` Fix It '' route . Whether it was a President Paul or Cruz -LRB- Trump might be another case altogether -RRB- I really ca n't see them announcing on TV that everyone 's subsidies were being ended immediately and that they would be seeing their health insurance rates increase by hundreds of dollars per month and `` good luck '' . It might not be political suicide but it would be one heck of a headache . Some sort of transitional approach coupled with new solutions would have to be devised to minimize further disruptions in people 's lives and to the healthcare/health care financing industries . So , as much as we may wish that ObamaCare had never arrived , it has . Being realistic , whether it is fixing it , replacing it or totally undoing it , none of those things will happen immediately and the most likely scenario is one where some aspects of the law are retained and others are jettisoned or modified over time . This means that the months and years ahead are almost guaranteed to be as chaotic and subject to rapid and repeated change as what we have experienced during the previous five years . Answer provided by Marlin McKelvy , Chartered Benefits Consultant and president of Consumer Directed Benefit Solutions insurance agency with over 30 years of employee benefits experience serving the insurance needs of businesses and individuals in Tennessee , Arkansas and Mississippi .
Obamacare -LRB- Affordable Care Act -RRB- , the signature legislation of President Barack Obama , is not likely to be repealed if/when a Republican wins the Presidential election in 2016 . If both the House of Representatives and Senate remain Republican-controlled , the chances of a repeal will increase . A more likely scenario is a re-tweaking of the ACA legislation with minor and incremental changes impacting State and Federal Exchanges . But the dismantling or elimination of the entire legislation is not going to happen . Answer provided by Edward Harris , one of the nation 's leading healthcare experts . His top-rated website Majormedicalhealth.com provides the lowest health insurance rates from top-rated companies .
That is a great question ! With the over fifty attempted repeal tries , and the very public stances against it that the Republican party has , you are certainly right to wonder . But for all of the bluster and rhetoric , here 's what the reality is - the American public does like the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- , as the uninsured rate is the lowest it 's been in decades . The Supreme Court decisions gives the Law solid legal footing . With an election looming , and still stinging from what most in the Republican party thought was going to be a slam-dunk win 4 years ago on a platform of repealing the Act , I think that the wiser leaders of the party know they need to rethink that strategy . As much as they dislike it , the voting electorate does like it , and sadly , many rely on the subsidies to be able to afford their coverage . The adding of Medicaid has progressed slowly but surely , even in the Red States that had spoken out against it , as leaders realize that after the nearly 2 decades of economic pressure , the average American needs the assistance . Even as there seems to be a to tendency to disregard facts in politics , when it comes down to where the votes are coming from , there can be softening or complete reversals of what had been very public stands on issues like health care.With the polling numbers falling solidly in favor of the Act , and the Law being upheld twice in the Supreme Court , I 'd suspect you will hear less talk of repealing the Act . That said , I 'm certain that each candidate will have an opinion on how he or she will change the Law to improve what does n't work as well as it could . There is intense pressure from the insurance companies to regain the incredible profits they were making , and other medical companies also would like to push their agenda 's , so the parts of the law that kept prices low I 'd expect to see attacked . So in short , repealed ? No . Changed ? Probably , depending upon the outcome of the election , and how the public responds to the proposed changes . A great question , and one we in the industry have been watching closely also . Thanks for asking !
Though many will claim Obamacare , which is designed to cover non-Medicare beneficaries , does not have any effect on Medicare , such a statement would be false . There are many provisions in the Affordable Care Act that call for funding reductions in the Medicare payment system , including a provision , including the following : * Medicare Funding Cuts of $ 457 Billion by 2020 . Approximately 50 % of cuts are proposed to come from Medicare providers in the form of reduced reimbursement rates . These cuts are expected to offset 30 % of the cost of reform for those under 65 . * Fewer Providers expected to be available 96 % of Providers in US Accept Medicare 80 % Accept New Medicare Patients -LRB- 60 % in Texas -RRB- Medicare Enrollment Growing by 10,000 people per day 28 % of New Medicare Recipients Has Trouble Finding A New Primary Care Doctor in 2012 30 % Proposed Reimbursements Reductions will lead to even fewer doctors accepting Medicare More Providers Opting-out of Medicare System -LRB- including the Mayo Clinic -RRB- Fewer Doctors + More Patients = Longer Wait Times * Medicare Advantage Funding Cuts $ 135 Billion through 2019 , including $ 7 Billion this year 2014 , . This has already lead totewer Plan Choices , Reduction in Benefits andHigher Premiums for many . * Tax Increases 3.8 % Additional Medicare Tax on High Earners 3.8 % Tax Increase on Investment Income 2.3 % New Tax on Medical Devices $ 72 Billion in New Taxes to Insurance Companies These taxes that will eventually by passed on to consumers in form of higher prices ! * Closing the Donut Hole * 50 % discount on brand name drugs * 7 % discount on generics * Consumer Rebates for Reaching Gap * By 2020 , the Donut Hole will be replaced with 25 % cost sharing on all medications * 3.4 million Americans Will No Longer Fall in to the Donut Hole Each Year * 27.5 million Americans that Never Reach the Donut Hole Will Pay More for Their Drugs * More Free Preventative Care Services are now availablerventions for tobacco users * Creation of Accountable Care Organizations and Independent Advisory Board Accountable Care Organizations - places a degree of financial responsibility on the providers in hopes of improving care management and limiting unnecessary expenditures . ACOs that lower the cost of care for their members will by paid 50 % of the cost savings generated by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services . Independent Advisory Board Goal of reducing the per capita rate when growth in Medicare spending exceeds targeted rate . Board will recommend changes that become a bill and sent to the President and Congress to pass . If not passed , Congress must provide a budget with equivalent funding cuts .
When Obamcare was passed in March of 2010 , one of the key objectives that had to be met from a political standpoint was showing that its costs over the coming 10 years would be under $ 1 trillion dollars . This somewhat arbitrary number was picked to say that Obamacare would cost less than what we had spent on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan , this may have made for good political theatre but what it really had to so with healthcare and health insurance in practical terms always kind of eluded me . One of the ways that the democrat party made the numbers work -LRB- and I 'm just stating historical facts here , no Republicans ever voted in favor of the Affordable Care Act -RRB- was that they transferred $ 700 billion in what would have been increased spending on Medicare over that 10 year period to fund ObamaCare . We will still be spending more on Medicare in the coming decade but the amount of available funding has certainly been sharply deflected downwards at a time when a record number of Americans will be in and entering the Medicare program . So , in this way , ObamaCare has shifted funds that would have otherwise gone towards Medicare to help paint a budget picture that allowed for the passage of the law . Of course , since then government estimates for the projected 10 year cost of Obamacare has gone far above the $ 1 trillion mark but , hey , they got the law passed and they did n't even really have to read it .
On March 23 , 2010 on a straight party line vote which was supported by no Republican members of the United States Congress . So , whether you love Obamacare or hate it , there is no question as to the responsibility for this far reaching piece of legislation and the impact it is having on our health insurance and health care systems .
Obamacare -LRB- The Affordable Care Act -RRB- is likely going to remain a piece of US healthcare history . Loved by many , and hated by many , Barack Obama 's major piece of legislation is unlikely to be repealed . However , tweaks , adjustments , and changes are very likely , as health insurance rates continue to increase , and out-of-pocket expenses for many Americans remains much higher than their budget allows . What changes will be coming ? Stay tuned since the road will be bumpy , and medical plan prices may fluctuate quite a bit from one carrier to another . Republican President ? Democratic President ? It probably wo n't matter , unless there is a `` Super Majority '' in both Houses of Congress . Important : Answer was provided by Edward Harris , one of America 's premier healthcare authorities . His award-winning website , healthinsurancezoom.com , provides the low
The cuts are real , and from what I see , the carriers are working to cut their costs in some creative ways . This can be a benefit for those among us that have neglected their health and fitness , or just need a little boost . For instance , fitness programs can now be an included benefit in Medicare Advantage Plans . Some carriers are giving gift cards to get your screenings done . Smoking and obesity education are often available . Yes , a more fit population lowers the cost for the carrier , but so what ! Why not take advantage of their programs , take some initiative and get some healthier life choices . Life is not a dress rehearsal , so make the most of your life by being as healthy as your age and abilities allow . Check out these new benefits , or call your agent to find out what supplemental programs are offered by your carrier . The cuts are not going away , so the healthier you are , the less you will feel the financial pinch of those cuts . Like your mom said , `` eat your vegetables ! ''
That is a great question ! There is an awful lot of misinformation , political manipulation , and muddying of the facts , so it 's really hard to see exactly what is going on . There are some good and bad things that the ACA does with its association with Medicare , and I 'll let you decide which is which . First off is you do not have any changes to your current plan , nor is it even legal for someone to tell you that you have to drop your current plan and try to enroll youin the marketplace . All current plans are grandfathered . One thing the ACA does is close the `` donut hole '' in coverage in Medicare part D . It will eventually phase out the patient cost until it becomes just the usual co-pay , increasing the likelihood that seniors will be able to afford their medications . It also expands coverage by making checkups and wellness visits -LRB- preventative care -RRB- not subject to deductible or co-pays . It does have cuts of $ 716 billion to the Medicare , mostly in the MedicareAdvantage plans that are run by private insurers . We are told that those cuts are to come from reduction in fraud , provider overpayments , and administration overhead . We are also told that the money from those cuts are being reinvested into the Medicare system , and that those reinvestments are expected to keep Medicare 's trust fund solvent until 2029 , an extra 12 years . It will also make cuts to hospitals that have higher return rates of patients by cutting the Medicare payments to those hospitals that are providing the least quality care . -LRB- Interestingly enough , that was a lead story on our news channel tonight , measuring the number of patients who returned to their hospital after treatment for infections that they got while in the hospital before their release . -RRB- Those are the bare bones of what the effects are supposed to be . How it will actually play out is anyone 's guess . Thanks for asking !
The answer to this depends on if you believe the HHS , the media or the Republicans . The Republicans seem to suggest that billions of Medicare funds are going to be reallocated to Obamacare -LRB- PPACA -RRB- . The HHS seems to suggest that redundant services offered through two government programs will be modified .
That is a great question , and I am certain that you are not the only one wondering ... I think that for all the fuss and bluster made about the ACA -LRB- Affordable Care Act - or `` Obamacare '' -RRB- that both parties realize that there are now roughly 18 million people enrolled in the program , and a good chunk of them would be uninsured without the Act . With every vote coming at a premium -LRB- lol , no pun intended -RRB- that is a number too large to gamble with losing . The Act has not been the budget busting , death camp creating nightmare that was so loudly forecasted , and other than a few disgruntled industries that had to cough up some bloated profits , and folks in some locations that did see premium prices increase , it has actually been fairly well received . The figures show that it has lowered overall healthcare costs substantially , and forced healthcare providers to improve in the quality of provided care and reduce overhead and inefficiencies . Forecasted healthcare costs by the Government 's measures without the Act in place are much higher than they are with the Act , and if Medicaid measures were adopted by those States that chose not to opt in , those costs would be even lower . So any fiscally responsible politician treads a thin line there in choosing publicly to repeal the Act . The fact that the Supreme Court has now twice upheld challenges to the Act also makes the repeal of the Act more problematic than it would have been had the Court struck down one or both of those challenges . When you tack on the generally favorable -LRB- over 80 % -RRB- approval rating the healthcare provided has generated , repealing the Act seems like a very risky idea if one wants to get re-elected . That said , there has been so much political time , money and hot air invested in reviling the Act that it seems unlikely that the ones banging that drum would willingly just abandon it . While it is possible , -LRB- there have been no serious alternatives to the act proposed or presented -RRB- for the plan to be repealed should a Republican Majority and Presidency occur , it is much more likely that any changes to the Act would be directed at what was the true rub for the most vocal opponents - the guaranteed subsidies , and the mandatory enrollment clauses . Since these were the targets of the legal challenges , it seems likely that there would be a belief that the newly acquired majorities would enable the changes to be made legislatively . Re-writing those portions of the Act would bypass for a time -LRB- until the inevitable ensuing legal challenges worked their way to a conclusion -RRB- the upheld judicial provisions . So in summary , repeal is unlikely , but I would look for a renewed assault upon certain provisions . I hope that helps clear up this very muddy water for you , and I thank you for asking !
I think this question depends on who you ask , as this is a politically charged question . As far as I can tell , $ 716 billion was cut from the Medicare Advantage Program . TheObama administration claims the was nota cut , because they were going to reduce payments for hospital services , skilled nursing services , hospice and other Medicare services . Of course , that was met with a lot ofnegative feedback on both sides of the aisle soit 's unclearif those cuts are actually going to take place . But if the cuts do n't take place , how would the $ 716 billion bepaidback into the Medicare fund?To some extent , the jury is still out on this one .
President Obama has said many times that he wants to end or reduce Medicare Advantage . He does not believe that for profit insurance companies should be competing with original Medicare with taxpayer money . Part of the funding for the Affordable Care Act -LRB- aka : Obamacare -RRB- is coming from cuts to the funding for Medicare Part C -LRB- Medicare Advantage . -RRB- It is expected that these cuts will increase premiums and reduce benefits for the people on Medicare Advantage and cause many of them to move back to original Medicare . Only time will tell .
Like original Medicare ultimately is financed through your taxes . Medicare pays private insurance companies a set amount per enrollee to administer the claims . The company can then take that money and develope their plan whithin guidelines set by Medicare . If the company is able to provide the benefits with the money provided by Medicare , then you may not have to pay an additional premium other than your normal Medicare Part B premium . If the benefits are more than Medicare allowance allows for then some plans charge an extra premium in addition to what Medicare provides . This is where the danger comes in when you hear about Medicare cutting funds to Medicare Advantage . Right now there are some very good zero premium plans available . These may be forced to go away if cuts are allowed to continue .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , How long does it take to get life insurance ? Well , generally speaking , it takes about 60 days . You 're going to have to fill out an application . You 're going to have to take a paramed exam . They 're going to order attending physician statements from your doctor . So when you do full underwriting , it takes between 60 days , and sometimes , depending upon if the carrier is very popular , it could take longer , up to 90 days . Keep in mind , if you do n't want to go through the full underwriting process , you could do simplified issue or you could do guaranteed issue . That would cut the time down . What you 're giving up by doing that is , without full underwriting , you 're just going to be used ... the boilerplate that they 're going to use for simplified and guaranteed is not going to be as cutting edge from a price point of view . You 'll probably wind up paying a little bit more . But if you want to really expedite your issue and get your policy in place , those two ideas could be a way to go .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Does No Claims Discount Mean On Car Insurance ?
Auto rates are set for standard risks . By not filing a claim you are distinguishing yourself as a somewhat better risk . In view of that the company is reducing the premium on your car . It does raise a serious question when you do encounter a potential claim . Unless the claim involves bodily injury or great liability you might want to call your agent prior to reporting the accident to your claims department .
That is a great question ! And I have a great answer - a no claims discount is a great thing to get . Your insurance company is giving you a discount on your insurance because you have been a safe driver , and not filed any claims in a specific time period . Good Job ! I hope that you get many more of them . Thanks for asking !
A no-claims discount is offered by many insurers . When applied , it reduces your auto insurance premium for not submitting claims over a specific period of time . And it can potentially increase every year if your good claims history continues . Does your company maximize your discount ? It can save quite a bit of money . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker for the last 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites .
The best answer to this is maybe . You can receive discounts for many things when applying for auto insurance . One of the available discounts is being married . However , if you are married , and only have one car then you are effectively nullifying the discount . The reason for this is the corollary discount to being married is the multi-car discount . If you are sharing a car with your spouse , then you will be rated for two drivers with one auto , which means more exposure and subsequently higher premiums . So the best way to maximize your insurance discounts is be married , each drive your own car , and throw on a type of homeowners policy , even if you are just renting . I hope this helps .
Sure it can . There are many factors that determine the final price of a car insurance policy . Certainly your driving record and history are important factors and , with many companies , so is your credit score . But there are other discounts that may be available depending on the company . Most companies offer discounts ofor insuring more than one car . In some cases , that discount gets deeper the more cars you insure . Liklewise , companies discount their car insurance if you also insure your home . Otheres apply an additional discount if you also insure your motorcycle , Boat or RV and others include a discount if you also have Life Insurance . Ask your insurance professional and you may be pleasantly surprised .
The whole issue of filing a claim presents a problem . Property claims are actually rare . Property insurers traditionally give either premium discounts or deductible discounts based on the period of time the policy has been claims-free . It is possible that a small claim would result in a loss of these discounts and the actual out-of-pocket expenses that you experience would be more than the amount recovered . There is also the matter of mitigation which means that you can often contain the expense of a claim . This might cost you but your net out of pocket expenses might be reduced . The bottom line is to know your agent , know your deductible , and make sure both of you know the discounts you might already be receiving , before you call that 800 number . If the house is on fire , dont wait !
I am not a representative of State Farm as I am an independent agent . However , with that being said , State Farm can OFFER the ability to cover hail damage . Every insurance company that can protect your personal auto is able to provide coverage for hail damage . You are looking for a coverage called Other-than-collision -LRB- OTC -RRB- or sometimes called comprehensive coverage . This coverage is often called all-risk -LRB- a misnomer -RRB- or open-peril coverage . What the heck does that mean ? It means that comprehensive covers EVERYTHING to your auto UNLESS it says it will not cover it . This is actually very robust as a coverage because its impossible to list everything that can happen to a car for exclusions , so you can have coverage for the random things that happen to your car . If you look at your policy for OTC , nowhere does it mention that it will exclude -LRB- not cover -RRB- hail damage . This is good ; it means you can file a claim for OTC to repair hail damage to your auto . Here are a few things to understand about OTC with regards to hail damage : You have to pay your deductible for the repairs . Most often , this means that the insurance company will pay you all the money to get the car fixed EXCEPT for your deductible , which you then pay to the repair company that fixed you car . So if $ 3,000 worth of repairs was needed to fix your car from hail damage , and you have a $ 500 deductible , then the insurance company will give you $ 2500 -LRB- $ 3,000 - $ 500 deductible -RRB- so you can pay your $ 3,000 repair bill . The claim settlement might happen in another way , but the logic is still the same . Your OTC will pay the actual cash value of the car if the repairs are over a certain threshold -LRB- which is determined individually for each car -RRB- to make the car usable again . The company can literally scrap the car and pay you for it instead of repairing the hail damage . Keep this in mind for when determining if you want to file a claim as some cars arent worth much but could be in EXCELLENT condition for driving . You dont want to lose your car because you filed a claim for cosmetic damage , or keep the car and get a salvage title . Talk to your agent to make sure you have OTC . Make sure that the deductible is an amount you can afford to pay in a reasonable amount of time . Its no good to have a $ 500 , $ 1000 , or $ 2,000 deductible for OTC if you can not get the money or put yourself in a poor financial position for 30 + days because of it . Sometimes paying the extra $ 5-10 per month for a lower deductible makes sense in households strapped for cash .
Most auto insurance companies/vehicle insurance companiesoffer a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount : typically , a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount is when you have 2 or more vehicles -LRB- cars , trucks , SUVs , motorcycles ... -RRB- on the same type ofpolicy . Insurance companies usually do n't allow the multi-car/multi-vehicle discount for different types of motorized vehicles on different policies . For example - if you have a car on one policy and a motorcycle on a different policy -LRB- but both policies are with the same insurance company -RRB- then usually you would not get a multi-car/multi-vehicle discount . You would get the multi-car discountif you have 2 cars insured on the same auto insurance policy . Also , most companies that insure motorcycles will give a multi-unit discount if you insure 2 or more motorcycles on the same motorcycle insurance policy . The key point with the multi-car/multi-vehicle discount is that you are usually required to have 2 or more vehicles covered on the same policy . It is always best to review with your professional independent insurance broker to find the coverage options , as well as ways to secureall availablediscounts -LRB- so you wo n't end up paying more than you have to for your insurance -RRB- .
Bob has good information but I will add that in many states the United Healthcare Plan -LRB- AARP -RRB- has a built in rate increase the first 10-years . This is in addition to the attained age rate increase that is already built in . The way they do that is they call it a `` discount . '' The discount is for age 65 applicants but even with the full discount the premium is not cheaper than other companies . But then they take a pro-rated amount of the discount away each year for 10-years . So in reality , it was n't really a discount but a built-in additional price increase that they never have to claim as a price increase . Regardless of what you think of the AARP organization , when it comes to their name on ANY insurance product , use the same caution that you would with any other company . The insurance companies just buy the use of the AARP name and logo . It does n't mean the product is a good value or a bad one . But it does catch some seniors off guard .
Home Insurance contracts differ in all States ; they are all governed by the Department/Division of Insurance dictating exactly how to abide by the rules of the particular State . Once abiding by the rules of each State , carriers also have differences in handling claims and policy adjustments thereafter . In States where a Claims Free discount is allowed , the discount will be removed on the following renewal if a claim has been filed , there may also be a claims surcharge assessed in addition . Some carriers have allowances for small claims below a certain pay out whereby the insured would lose the Claims Free discount but not be assessed a further surcharge.Since it will be close to impossible to get a clear answer to this question , the following is the best rule of thumb for policyholders : DO NOT USE YOUR INSURANCE POLICY AS A CHECK BOOK ! Property Insurance is meant to protect the insured against unforeseen and unaffordable sudden & accidental perils . The home should always be well maintained and display pride of ownership for ` preferred ' risks . For example , if due to high winds a branch would be blown off a tree and simply break a window or damage a few roof tiles , this is typically not what one would purchase insurance for ; on the other hand , if there is an unforeseen electrical fault causing a house fire or perhaps the occurrence of a devastating storm , this is where insurance becomes an essential part of the recovery process . Insurance contracts are designed with a Deductible ; the deductible is the amount deducted from a Claims Payout . The actual purpose of the Deductible is to reduce the carrier 's risk exposure to small claims , the lower the deductible , the higher the premium . Clients that purchase insurance with a higher deductible make a statement acknowledging that small claims will not be brought to the carrier thus prompting the carrier to accept a lower premium for a lower risk exposure . Once a claim is filed with a Home Insurance Carrier , a claims number is assigned and the claim is reported electronically to the National Claims Database -LRB- CLUE -RRB- . The purpose of this reporting process is for the industry to share information regarding the risk thereby deterring any dishonest practices in attempting to misrepresent risk to an alternate carrier at a future point . This is a great tool that has been used for many years preventing carriers from taking on adverse risk . The answer to this question was carefully orchestrated to provide a better understanding regarding the underwriting and claims process which would lead ultimately to premium assessment . It is strongly suggested that home owners fully understand this process and contact a licensed professional to answer any further questions regarding the process .
I love CPA 's . They give great accounting advice and some of them even know other things . But the `` minimum limits '' advice defies his training in some important ways . What your son lacks in `` assets '' he more than makes up for in terms of `` potential '' . What I mean here is that he may not have it now , but due to his young age , he 'll have a long time to earn and pay . Even though he is only 18 does not mean that he can not be responsible for an injury or death , or damage to property , and be subjected to an order of the court to garnishee his wage to make reimbursement to those who were injured , killed , or had property damaged . Now , should have have his own insurance ? Assuming he owns the car , he probably needs his own insurance . Staying in the household under household coverage is also OK but some insurers concern themselves with the owner of the car being different than the insured on the policy so proceed with caution when the vehicle is not actually owned by the policyholder . As a practical matter , the discounts that you might enjoy are lost to the child in many cases when they have their own policy . Some companies will extend multi-policy discounts to children of the policy owner . Some discounts do n't come through this connection , however . I like kids learning the responsibility of maintaining their own insurance . It gets the loss off the parents record , for one . Parents can help subsidize the cost if they want and help provide this as a reward for good outcomes on something else . All things said and done , I like responsible children on their own policies but deal with young drivers both on and off the parents policies so it comes down to personal preference and whether you are dealing with issues that poison the whole policy because of the young driver , or not , in many cases .
Your education does not necessarily effect your car insurance . What I mean by this is you are not going to get better or worse coverage based upon what kind of degree you have . However , having an advanced degree can offer you some premium discounts . With one of the carriers I work with they will offer a discount for any degree above a high school diploma . So , if you have a Ph.D , J.D. M.D. / D.O. you will receive a greater discount . I hope this helps .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
Regardless of the type of car that you drive , the best way to control your insurance costs is to talk to your Insurance Professional about all available discounts and coverage options that are available to you . Talk about various deductibles for both Comprehensive and Collision . Talk about `` bundling '' your personal insurance program because many companies offer nice discounts if you insure your home and car together . Others deepen thse discounts if you also have life insurance or other coverage wit the same company . some companies offer discounts if your car is equipt with an alarm or theft recovery system , while others offer you the chance to have a monitoring chip plugged into your car to see if your driving habits qualify you for reduced rates .
If both cars are day to day usse cars , titled and registered to you personally you could I suppose , but not a great idea.Most companies offer mult car discounts for insuring more than one car . Insuring twqo cars on two separate company policies would just not be maximising your discount possibilities and could therefore end up costing more . Now , having said that , if you have a regular day to day car and also own a collector car , then it would make sense to insure the collector car with a company that specializes in those .
Insurance companies sometimes offer either a premium discount or a reduced deductible for every year that there arent any claims filed against the policy . These discounts can become substantial as claims against homeowners policies are infrequent . When a claim is small the money received -LRB- adjusted amount minus deductible -RRB- might be less than the discounts currently being applied . In this case loss of those discounts would be much greater than the small recovery on a claim .
Most people dont enjoy paying their auto insurance premiums each and every month ! So , they often look forward to scheduled rate decreases , such as at the age of 25 . Why do car insurance rates decrease at this age ? Well , because the majority of crash claims are filed by young -LRB- ages 16 through 24 -RRB- and older drivers . As a driver matures , they become less likely to become involved in a crash according to statistics , so to offer an incentive for drivers to stay with a particular insurance company , discounts are often offered at the age of 25 . While it is generally true that auto insurance rates will decrease at the age of 25 , it isnt always the case . Drivers can expect their car insurance rates to decline at the age of 25 assuming the following remain constant - their driving history , incident history , and the make and model of their car . If all of these factors remain the same , male drivers can expect a premium discount as high as 20 % , while female drivers can expect a 12-15 % discount on their rate . Keep in mind that the above discount ranges are averages ; there isnt currently a standard amount of deduction that can be expected ; rate decreases will depend not only on the drivers history , but the insurance company , the type of coverage selected and the overall state of the economy .
Without speaking with the carrier that is providing this discount or reading the policy itself I can only guess . I believe that a no claims discount means that the carrier is providing you a discount on your homeowners policy because you have not had any homeowners insurance claims for at least the last five years .
A no-claims discount is offered by many insurers . When applied , it reduces your auto insurance premium for not submitting claims over a specific period of time . And it can potentially increase every year if your good claims history continues . Does your company maximize your discount ? It can save quite a bit of money . LIVE answer provided by : Ed Harris - Premier car insurance broker for the last 33 years and owner of several top-rated websites .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
How Much Disability Insurance Can You Buy ?
How much disability insurance can you buy ? Well , here 's a secret that not many people know about . Normally , if you have group insurance and individual disabiliy insurance , it 's a combination between the two till you hit 70 % of your income.So if your group covers 60 % of your income , your individual will top out at 10 % . Now , if you have no group disability in place when you purchase individual , you can get up to 70 % in income covered . Then if you join a group plan , the two combine and can push the total well over 100 % of your income . So if you know kids finishing college or advanced schooling , get them to consider disability now ! before they go to work .
There are several benefit triggers for disability insurance that may impact the level of benefit you can purchase . Most carriers will limit the monthly benefit to a percentage of your monthly gross income . The percentage ranges from 50 % to 70 % . There will also be a hard dollar cap that may apply to people with higher incomes . The policy elimination period comes into play most frequently , as most disabilities have a very short duration . Shorter elimination periods often result in more frequent , and larger claims payments .
For some people , private disability insurance that covers 60-70 % of your income is n't enough to feel financially secure . In those cases , it 's recommended that you look into retirement security disability insurance . People forget that when you go out on claim , your contributions to your 401k or other retirement funds are stopped . Retirement DI will continue to pay a benefit to your retirement savings . Also , it 's good to look into critical illness insurance for the extra lump sum payout while you 're waiting for your individual DI elimination period to pass .
When purchasing disability insurance the answer depends . Most short term disability plans have a set dollar amount that can be paid daily , weekly or monthly not to exceed 70 % of your income . On long term disability plans it is usually up to 70 % of your current income . There are plans that have lower maximums . Be sure and shop for the plans up to 70 % . The answer to your question is as much as you can afford over the long term up to these amounts .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
How much disbility insurance should you buy ? A combination of the most you can get and what you can afford . If you already have group insurance in place , usually you can only buy up to 70 % of yourwagescombined between individual and group . If group is not in place you can buy individual coverage up to 70 % and combine with group later to actually insure more than 100 % of your income . The hard part with how much coverage should you buy is how much will it cost ? Getting the full level of coverage can be pretty hefty as far as premium goes .
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I would say yes . Your ability to earn income is likely your biggest asset , so what would you do if you lost that ability ? Some important things think about when trying to figure out if disability insurance is right for you is : 1 -RRB- If you became disabled , could you continue to pay your bills -LRB- mortgage payments , car payments , credit card payments , etc. -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- How long would your savings last ? 3 -RRB- Would you still be able to retire when you planned or send your children to college ? 4 -RRB- What happens to your bonus compensation and retirement contributions ? Could you keep paying the overhead expenses if you own a business ? Most disabilities are not work related and therefore not covered by workers compensation and it can be very difficult to qualify for social security disability as many disability claims are denied - even if you are approved for Social Security , the payments will probably be significantly less than you earn . Disability insurance can protect you from losing your income and is one of the most important types of insurance you can buy , especially for business owners , key employees , physicians , attorneys , and anyone who has family that depends on their ability to provide income . A big advantage with disability insurance is that when you have a qualifying claim that triggers disability payments , the monies paid to you are paid as tax-free income -LRB- as long as you paid the prmeiums with your after tax dollars - most people do -RRB- . Please note , when you 're looking to purchase disability insurance , work with an experienced , independent disability insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level to help you determine what program is suitable to your needs and budget -LRB- disability insurance policies are very customizable -RRB- . Make sure you pay attention to the language in the policy - most importantly the definition of disability . The definition of disability is the most important aspect of your disability insurance policy and you want to secure the best definition you can -LRB- `` true own occupation '' is very much regarded as the best definition you can have -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your disability insurance needs , including quotes and program comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
When buying Disability insurance you need to consider how many years you want it to last , how many months you want to wait from incurring the disability until you receive the first payment -LRB- elimination period -RRB- , and how much of your income you want to replace . You need to consider features like whether it will pay if you are able to go back to work but not are not back up to your old wages -LRB- residual disability -RRB- , whether it will pay if you can not perform your own occupation , and whether it has a cost of living rider . Finally , you need to consider your budget and how much of the above you can afford , then pick out the features that are most important to you .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
Disability insurance protects one of your greatest assets - your ability to work.If you ca n't work because of an injury or illness , how do you provide income for you and your family . The answer ? Your disability insurance . When you 're buying a disability policy , the MOST important factor in the policy structure is theDEFINITION OF DISABILITY.Each policy will use 1 of the 3 definitions : 1 -RRB- True Own Occupation - this says you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation , even if you are at work in another occupation . In short , this is the most favorable definition you can have . 2 -RRB- Modified Own Occupation - this says that you are considered totally disabled if , solely due to injury or sickness , you are not able to perform the material and substantial duties of your occupation . This one is commonly seen in many individual disability insurance policies . 3 -RRB- Gainful Occupation - this says if you are unable to perform the duties of your occupation or any occupation for which you are qualified for by education , training , or experience due to sickness or injury . In short , this is the least favorable definition . This one is commonly seen in group disability insurance policies through an employer and property and casualty insurers that offer disability coverage . Disability insurance depends on a number of factors . The cost -LRB- your premium -RRB- is based on a number of factors - the most important being your medical history , your job , and your income - and the policies are very customizable . There are many moving parts to disability insurance and is not something I would suggest trying to buy on your own - this is a type of coverage you should consult with an experienced independent disability insurance broker about . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You may have group disability insurance available to you through your employer , however , you will find generally find stronger coverage through an individual disability insurance plan . A disability is a sickness or injury which interferes in your ability to work and earn a living . In disability insurance , there 's 3 types of definitions that a policy can use - the definition of disability in the policy is the MOST IMPORTANT factor to look at in a policy . The 3 definitions of disability that a policy can use are true own occupation , modified own occupation , and gainful occupation . True own occupation is the best definition you can have . Gainful occupation is commonly seen in group policies and offers the least coverage . One of the drawbacks of group coverage is if your employment is terminated , you lose the coverage . An individual policy goes with you wherever you go and generally features stronger coverage and a better definition of disability -LRB- a true own occupation or modified own occupation definition -RRB- . You want to buy your disability insurance when you 're healthy - this type of coverage is much more in depth than life and health insurance . If you have a pre-existing condition , you may face an exclusion rider for the condition under a given policy or be postponed for the coverage until it 's resolved . Disability insurance is a very complex type of insurance that has moving parts to policies . If you 're looking to apply for coverage , you want to work with agents that have in-depth knowledge of products , how disability insurance works , and have experience with these programs to help you through the process from start to finish and make the process as seemless as possible . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In order to figure out how much Disability Insurance you should have , you need to understand that Disability Insurance is based on your current income . Depending on how much you make , you may qualify for up to 70 % of your gross income . This said , you need to understand what your need may be , how much you can afford within your budget and design the policy to cover any partial disability . Without knowing your specific situation , I would start with the maximum benefit , and go from there . If you need help looking at some quotes , do not hesitate to contact me or your local insurance broker . Thank you for the question .
How much disability benefits can you get ? Well it 's going to depend on what you may have through your employer and the order the plans are purchased in . Usually an individual disability plan will allow the purchase of up to 70-80 % of your income . If you have an employer sponsored plan in place , the insurance company may limit how much they will sell you to keep coverage in that 70-80 % range . However , you can buy individual coverage first and then if later your employer adds disability coverage as a benefit you can cover 100 % of you income .
If you think you might qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you should first file for disability benefits through the Social Security Administration . If approved , you may be able to get Medicare prior to age 65 due to a disability . In order to qualify for Medicare due to a disability , you must meet the criteria defined by the Social Security Administration : `` Social Security pays only for total disability . No benefits are payable for partial disability or for short-term disability . `` Disability '' under Social Security is based on your inability to work . We consider you disabled under Social Security rules if : You can not do work that you did before ; We decide that you can not adjust to other work because of your medical condition -LRB- s -RRB- ; and Your disability has lasted or is expected to last for at least one year or to result in death '' . You can apply for benefits through Medicare because of a disability online at : WEBSITELINK if you are tech savvy . If you choose not to apply online , you can apply at any local Social Security Administration office by phone or in person and you can call ahead to make an appointment by calling 1-800-772-1213 . If you are deaf or hearing impaired , call the SSA 's toll-free TTY number , 1-800-325-0778 . Their representatives are available from 7AM to 7PM , Monday through Friday . It is important to note that this definition of disability `` is different than other programs '' and `` is a strict definition of disability '' according to the Social Security Administration . There are many , more comprehensive disability policies available which allow benefits to be paid for a partial disability , for example , or pay benefits to help with various expenses such as paying your mortgage in the event that you suffer a disability . In addition , these policies can be purchased for key people in a business such as a business partner or profitable executive . For questions regarding which disability policy may be best for you or how much coverage you may need , it is best to speak with an Insurance Professional . They are highly trained in the business of Insurance , and will complete a full analysis of your needs and make recommendations based on what 's in your best interest . An Insurance Professional is a great resource for any other programs and products that may be of benefit to you including state and federal resources that you may qualify for based on your unique situation such as applying for Disability through the Social Security Administration . There is a reason they are so highly trained and regulated ! Resources : www.ssa.gov
Yes . Many individuals will set up a short term disability policy as well as a long-term disability policy to cover different types of scenarios -LRB- e.g. if you become permanently disabled vs. being temporarily disabled -RRB- . Some individuals will have a group DI policy through an employer and supplement it with an individual DI policy if they feel the group DI does n't provide enough benefits or a very good `` definition of disability '' -LRB- the most important factor with DI coverage -RRB- - when buying disability insurance , make sure of -LRB- and understand -RRB- the definition of disability that 's being cited in the program -LRB- own occupation , modified , or gainful - this is the most important factor in your disability policy as it will determine if you are eligible for a claim when something happens -RRB- . Please note , disability insurance policies coordinate benefits so there 's a limit to how much coverage and what kind you can secure -LRB- most carriers will keep it to a maximum of 70 % of income - the percentage can vary by insurance company -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help setting up coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Cover A Hospital Bed ?
Medicare Part B covers hospital beds as a type of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- - it must be prescribed for use in your home by a doctor and the doctor is enrolled in Medicare . Medicare will generally cover 80 % of the expenses with you responsible for the other 20 % . You will want to find out if the supplier accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- - if they do not , you would be responsible for any excess charges . I highly recommend securing a Plan F or G Medicare supplement to cover any excess charges .
Medicare pays for a hospital bed when a doctor prescribes use of the bed as being medically necessary and when the person needing the bed is covered by Medicare Part B. To qualify for the care as medically necessary , one of the following must be true : 1 -RRB- You can not change positions in a normal bed 2 -RRB- You need that type of bed to change positions for pain relief 3 -RRB- You need to sleep with the head of the bed elevated at least 30 degrees for medical reasons 4 -RRB- You need traction equipment that must be attached to a hospital bed
Hospital beds are considered durable medical goods and are covered under Medicare Part B . If you can prove that the hospital bed is medically necessary and you have Medicare Part B then the cost of the hospital bed will be covered under medicare .
Medicare has specific fees for DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- including wheel chairs , walkers and hospital beds . DME supplies are covered under Medicare Part B . You should always use a Medicare approved DME supplier and make sure they accept assignment . The hospital bed requires a doctors prescription . Your DME supplier can give you an idea of how much Medicare will pay toward the cost of renting a bed .
Medicare pays for a hospital bed under `` durable medical equipment '' . If you need an adjustable bed please discuss this with your doctor and alert them that you are going to purchase a bed and the company selling the bed will bill medicare so you can ask the doctor if he will certify it as being medically necessary
A Medicare swing bed is used when a patient still needs rehabilitation or skilled nursing services after a consecutive stay in an acute care hospital of at least 3 days . Medicare will pay for this stay up to 20 days in full and up to 100 days with a copay . Swing beds are located in Medicare approved small rural hospitals that offer both acute care and skilled nursing or rehabilitative care , and in Medicare approved skilled nursing facilities .
Health insurance is intended to pay for items that are medically necessary . No matter how much better a new mattress may be for any medical condition one may have , you would be hard pressed to find a physician that is going to prescribe a new bed and deem it medically necessary . And , even if you found a doctor to write such a prescription , you are going to have a very difficult time convincing an insurance company this was an true medical need , as opposed to something to help you sleep better . If you are covered by Medicare , and prescribe a hospital bed , that is covered under Medicare Part B as durable medical equipment , with you being responsible for buying 20 % of the Medicare-approved cost of a hosptial bed after your deductible has been met .
Guidelines for what type of bed Medicare will pay for varies by state . In all states , Medicare will not pay for the cost of a fully electric bed . However , Medicare will pay for the cost of a semi-electric bed when there is a medical necessity for that type of bed . You can then pay for the difference so that you can purchase a fully electric bed , if desired .
One Medicare 72 hour rule is the rule that dictates that you must spend at least three days , or 72 hours , as an inpatient in the hospital before you can be discharged to a Medicare bed in a skilled nursing facility . This means three consecutive nights after being formally admitted as an inpatient . Inpatient status may not necessarily begin the first night spent in the hospital . Another Medicare 72 hour rule relates to billing . It states that services receives 72 hours before a hospitalization must be bundled into one bill .
Medicare will pay for an in home hospital bed that has been ordered by a doctor and approved by Medicare . You generally have the option to rent or purchase the bed under Medicare part B . The regular deductible and 20 % copay apply , although a medical supplement plan can sometimes offset these costs .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
Medicare Part B covers hospital beds as a type of durable medical equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- - it must be prescribed for use in your home by a doctor and the doctor is enrolled in Medicare . Medicare will generally cover 80 % of the expenses with you responsible for the other 20 % . You will want to find out if the supplier accepts assignment -LRB- accepting the Medicare-approved amount as payment in full -RRB- - if they do not , you would be responsible for any excess charges . I highly recommend securing a Plan F or G Medicare supplement to cover any excess charges .
Medicare Part B covers many DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- items including wheelchairs , walkers and hospital beds . As a general rule , blood pressure monitors are not a covered expense , but there are exceptions . If you are on home dialysis your BP monitor should be covered . If your doctor wants 24 hour readings , Medicare may cover an ambulatory monitor .
Medicare does cover Durable Medical Equipment , however , exercise equipment would most likely not be covered . DME is most often things like wheelchairs , hospital beds , oxygen equipment , nebulizers and the like . In most cases , Medicare will pay 80 % and you would be responsible for 20 % . Depending on the plan you choose , the 20 % would be covered by your Medigap policy . To find out for sure , call 1-800-MEDICARE .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not cover adult incontinence diapers and bed liners used at home because they are thrown away after each use , and not considered Durable Medical Equipment -LRB- DME -RRB- . If hospitalized or in a skilled nursing facility , Medicare will pay for incontinence diapers under Part A. Medicare will cover catheters .
Medicare Part B covers durable medical equipment -LRB- walkers , wheelchairs and power mobility devices , power lifts , oxygen , prosthetics , hospital bed , infusion pumps , nebulizers , CPAP devices for sleep apnea -RRB- . After the Part B deductible of $ 166 has been met Medicare will cover 80 % for durable medical equipment . If you have a Medicare Supplement it will pay the other 20 % .
In some situations you may qualify for special beds and or mattresses . If you are completely immobile , or have a tendency towards bed sores , Medicare Part B may authorize payment for a special bed or mattress . Best to ask your doctor for advice on this matter . Be sure to use a Medicare approved DME provider and one that accepts assignment .
Unfortunately , Medicare does not pay for incontinence supplies such as adult diapers and bed pads . If the insured person is in a hospital or skilled nursing facility , those items will be covered under Medicare Part A.Otherwise , Part B will not cover them due them not being classified as durable medical equipment .
Medicare Part B covers DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- including hospital beds , canes , walkers and wheelchairs . To qualify your doctor must prescribe the devices and you must use a Medicare approved DME provider . Be sure to ask if they accept assignment . The nursing homes I have visited have their own wheel chairs . I am not sure why you need or want Medicare to pay for yours .
Most DME -LRB- durable medical equipment -RRB- is covered by Medicare Part B . As for most DME 's , you must have a medical necessity for the equipment as certified by your doctor . After you have paid your Part B deductible , Medicare will pay 80 % of the allowed amount for a hospital bed and you pay the remaining balance . You should use a Medicare approved supplier that takes assignment to lower your OOP costs .
end question
start question
annuities
How Do Fixed Annuity Companies Make Money ?
Companies which offer Fixed Annuities & Fixed Indexed Annuities make money in several different strategies depending on the product . Some annuities have caps . The company will make money from interest earned over the cap . Other annuity products have spreads or fees meaning they will take a % which is set at the time the contract is taken . Others will have participation rates meaning you participate or get a % of the interest which was earned . There are a few other ways as well . if you have a specific question about an annuity you are looking at , do not hesitate to call your Broker or reach out to me .
Fixed annuities are similar to CDs in the sense that they pay guaranteed interest rates . The advantages are that fixed annuities typically pay interest rates considerably higher than bank CDs . Insurance companies also have tougher financial standards to meet for cash reserves than banks which can make them more secure in the eyes of a consumer . There are several different types of fixed annuities but they fall into two main categories immediate and deferred . Immediate annuities make a fixed payment determined by how much money you put into the annuity and your age . Deferred annuities accumulate interest and offer different payout strategies later in life . The longer you wait to initiate payout , the larger the payout each year . Many retirees are using deferred annuities as part of their retirement income strategy because it is guaranteed income for either a specific period or a lifetime stream of income . You can choose options like single life payout or joint life payout . If this sounds familiar , it is essentially like setting up your own personal retirement pension . The biggest concern from most folks heading into retirement is that they will run out of money before they die . Fixed annuities can help remove that concern as they can help avoid the ups and downs of a volatile stock market . Other advantages of a fixed annuity include a low investment limits . There are many companies that have minimums of just a few thousand dollars . The interest paid as your annuity grows in value is also tax deferred until you pull the money out . The biggest drawback of a fixed annuity is cash liquidity . Lets say you put in $ 100,000 and intend to begin taking lifetime income seven or ten years later but two years into that period , you changed your mind and want to withdraw your money . Just like with a bank CD , there will be a consequence for early withdrawal . This surrender charge can be significant . Whats the reason for the surrender charge ? The insurance company has taken your money along with thousands of other folks money and invested it in long term financial vehicles based on your initial commitment and now youre asking them to bust your money out because of your personal situation and that costs them money . The solution : Only put money in a fixed annuity that you are certain can be left alone to complete the strategy you set out on . Most fixed annuities do not have inflation adjustments . The spending power of a monthly payment over time will erode based on inflation and that needs to be taken into consideration . There are fixed annuities with inflation protection available at an additional cost . You can also use a laddered approach with multiple annuities to combat inflation concerns during retirement . If your own a single-life annuity and you begin receiving income and then die a year or two later , depending on the contract , payments could cease . The guaranteed payout in a situation like this varies significantly from product to product and this should be of primary concern when evaluating which annuity product or company best meets your individual needs . The best way to avoid this risk is to consider a joint-life annuity . Of course , there are many different types of fixed annuities and you need to consult with a qualified retirement income adviser in order to determine which type of fixed annuity fits your particular situation .
In general , there are two types of annuities : variable annuities and fixed annuities . Variable annuities are often described as mutual funds inside an insurance contract . Variable annuities have fees that are higher than fixed annuities , and while they are subject to market gains , they can also be subject to market losses . It is possible to lose principal in a variable annuity . Surrender charges apply and can be significant in the first few years . Insurance companies take your annuity money and make long-term commitments using that money and if you decide to pull your money out on an accelerated schedule other than that which was originally agreed upon , they can lose out on their long-term investment . Fixed annuities , which include indexed annuities , are not subject to market losses and most come with the commitment to `` never go down '' in value . Fixed annuities have penalties for early withdrawal and they are significant in the first few years . You are generally allowed an amount you can withdraw `` penalty free '' each year - around 10 % . Fixed annuities are not FDIC insured . They are based on the `` claims paying ability and financial strength of the issuing insurance company '' . Look at the history of insurance companies over the past 100 + years and you 'll probably favor what you see over the banking industry . While there are some `` annuity bashers '' out there , they generally have a product they are trying to sell that suits their agenda or wallet . Annuities should be considered a long-term product and if you purchase an annuity , you should only do so with money you are certain will not be needed over the life of that annuity . There are penalty free withdrawal provisions and you should be aware of what those are . Annuities have lots of advantages and certainly some disadvantages as well . As always , the suitability of a financial product is based on your specific situation and needs and a licensed , qualified financial professional should be sought out to help .
A fixed annuity is a contract issued by an insurance company . In that contract the owner is not really required to do anything except make at least one deposit . The insurance company guarantees everything else . The insurance company will accumulate money in the annuity , if it is deferred , and guarantees that the money will receive a guaranteed amount of interest each year . Currently there are a great number of fixed annuities in force with interest rates far in excess of the interest rates offered to new customers . The company guarantees those rates for as long as the contract is in force . These guarantees continue into the annuitization phase when the company will return to the annuitant an amount of money guaranteed by a formula inside the contract and will make those payments until the annuitant passes away , or even beyond in many cases . Everything is guaranteed by the company . In contrast a variable annuity has few guarantees . The owner can choose into which funds the deposits will be invested and can often select to maintain that control even when the policy is annuitizing . This results in uneven results both during accumulation and annuitization . Sometimes that works for the benefit of the annuitant , but it could work against the annuitant if the underlying securities fail to perform . Incidentally it takes someone with a variable annuity license to sell this product . An indexed annuity is somewhere in between these extremes . The money that accumulates in the contract usually has a guaranteed minimum level of interest . This is often 0 which can be a great deal better than a significant minus number . The amount of interest credited to the account is linked by the insurance company to one of the leading indexes . The Dow Jones Average is one index . The Standard and Poors index is another . The company uses these indexes to set the interest that will be credited to the account . Normally the index annuity does not receive the exact interest rate indicated by the index . There will either be a ceiling above which the insurance company will not go or the interest rate is modified by a factor . For example if the S&P went up 10 % , depending upon the contract , the indexed annuity might pay 7 % or 70 % of the index according to the contract . However it might pay 5 % because there is a 5 % ceiling on the interest the company will pay . The index annuity is attractive because it allows the annuitant to participate in the results of the market without ever actually holding shares of stock . It has upside potential but it doesnt have any downside risk . During a rising market we would expect the index annuity to do quite well , However , it might not do as well as the Variable Annuity . During a down market it will not lose money , however a Variable Annuity can lose money . At the same time the Fixed Annuity will continue to earn its guaranteed rate of interest and may even raise its interest rate from time to time , but everything is guaranteed .
A Fixed Annuity is a general term for an Annuity with a fixed interest rate , as opposed to a variable rate dependent on the stock market . The most typically referred to annuity when someone says `` fixed annuity '' , is a Fixed Deferred Annuity . This gives a compounding interest rate for a specific period of time . Most Fixed Deferred Annuities are able to be annuitized after the first or second year . Annuitizing a Fixed Deferred Annuity means to set up a yearly stream of income based on your life expectancy . Another type of Fixed Annuity is a Fixed Immediate Annuity . Instead of the ability to defer Annuitization , the contract immediately starts to pay a lifetime income stream . There are also Fixed Period Certain Annuities which pay an income stream for a specific number of years . And Fixed indexed Annuities , which guarantee a minimum interest rate , while crediting a limited interest rate based on the gains of a market index .
Fixed annuities can definitely be a great idea for seniors . The set payout creates a known , predictable income stream that helps supplement a senior 's other retirement income . They are low-risk and generate a guaranteed interest rate return . There are immediate and deferred fixed annuities and they are set up through insurance companies . If you 're already at the retirement age , you may want to consider an immediate annuity . If you 're in younger years , then a deferred annuity may be more preferable . An immediate fixed annuity makes fixed payments starting when the annuity is established that are determined by your age and the size of your annuity -LRB- how much money you put into it -RRB- . A deferred annuity accumulates over time . If you would like to look into fixed annuities in further detail and see what interest rates are available in today 's market from a number of different carriers , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name . I have an agent in my office that has a strong background in fixed annuities and can help get your program set up . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me with any other questions as well . Thanks very much .
Most IRA 's are fixed annuities but not all fixed annuities are IRA 's . All that this means is that a fixed annuity can be a fixed annuity . A fixed annuity as an IRA is not subject to the direct effect of market risks because the account assets are not held in separate accounts and then invested in marketable securities . Instead , an IRA is invested in high quality instruments by the carrier and the carrier assumes the risk to the IRA capital and to the rate of interest promised to you . The IRA pays interest at fixed rates . A variation of this arrangement is an IRA that is coupled with market investments that have more upside potential for gain without becoming variable products . These are called `` fixed index annuities '' -LRB- FIA -RRB- that are based upon one or another of the market indexes and one of several interest and gain crediting methods . The caveat is that the IRA is guaranteed by the underwriting company -LRB- usually insurance -RRB- and invested similarly to those of most IRA annuities . In FIA accounts , the client shares in the upside potential for gain with the underwriting company and has better upside chances to earn better than the minimum performance guarantees the carriers provides for their IRA with you . This enables you to have performance that more closely matches your interest rate performance to stock and bond market performance . All insurance underwriters of IRA annuities guarantee a fixed minimum rate of return . Performance above the minimum in a FIA is credited to you when market conditions permit and you share with the carrier in these additional returns . Regardless of performance , the minimum rate of return is still owed and paid and the insurance carrier bears this risk of performance . Variable annuities , on the other hand , have no guarantee of performance and may pay nothing at all . Of course , with a greater risk in a variable annuity , performance can be stronger too but the trade off is no gain at all for the possible upside potential . Hope this explanation helps you understand that a fixed annuity can work perfectly well for an IRA .
There are two basic classifications of annuities , immediate and deferred . The immediate annuity provides income payments over the lifetime of the annuitant starting within one year of the deposit . The deferred annuity doesnt start payments until a later date . Deferred annuities may increase in value over time . That increase is not subject to income tax as it occurs . This deferral of taxation is a major attraction of annuities . A deferred annuity can be either a single premium annuity or a flexible annuity . As a single premium annuity it is often used to augment retirement income at a later date , when other streams of income may have ceased . It is often used to anticipate increases in inflation , providing a much needed boost in income . As a flexible deferred annuity the contract allows the owner to make deposits on either a scheduled or unscheduled basis into the policy . As mentioned previously earnings on the contract are not taxed in the years that the money is accumulating . A deferred annuity can be classified into three major groups . The first would be the fixed annuity , the second would be the variable annuity and the third would be the indexed annuity . The fixed annuity is issued by an insurance company . The owner makes at least one deposit and everything that takes place later is the responsibility of the insurance company . The company guarantees the growth and guarantees the future payments . There isnt any market risk in this policy . A variable annuity , while structured similarly by the insurance company that issues it , allows that the owner can select the funds that will accumulate to provide future benefits . In some cases it may extend the privilege of selecting underlying funds into the annuitization phase which will result in uneven results but has the potential of exceptional growth . An index annuity lies somewhere in between . The index annuity is designed by the insurance company but rather than paying a guaranteed rate of interest , bases interest payments on the performance of one of the leading market indicators . Commonly these policies are linked to the Dow Jones Average or the Standard and Poors index . The annuity has restrictions on the amount of interest credited . The interest rate can either be capped at a preset percentage or the policy can be written so that only a percentage of the rate is applied to the money in the annuity . The trade-off comes when the company guarantees a minimum rate of interest . That minimum rate is often 0 % . What this means is that the annuity can participate somewhat in the increases experienced in the stock market without the risk of losing anything . This is quite attractive and currently very popular . An aspect of all annuities that is often overlooked is that they are not subject to probate . That means that as a contract the value of the annuity passes to a designated beneficiary without the expensive and time consuming process known as probate . Taxation of annuities is another subject but it is important to know where the annuity is going to be held to determine its taxation .
Indexed annuities are different from other fixed annuities because of the way it credits interest to your annuity 's value . Some fixed annuities only credit interest calculated at a rate set in the contract . Other fixed annuities also credit interest at rates set from time to time by the insurance company . Indexed Annuities credit interest using a formula based on changes in the index to which the fixed indexed annuity is linked . The formula decides how the additional interest , if any , is calculated and credited . How much additional interest you get and when you get it depends on the features of your particular contract ?
Pros Immediate annuities are , in my opinion , the most useful of the suite . For Americans who will not be retiring with a meaningful stream of pension income , immediate annuities offer that potential . Because an immediate annuity is purposefully consuming both interest and principal to create an income stream , the individual distributions are likely to be higher than anyone could justify taking from a balanced portfolio of investments , where maintenance of the principal balance is often the goal . Fixed annuities allow an investor to lock in rates of return that are comparable to CDs , but likely for longer terms -LRB- whereas CDs are typically quoted in months , fixed annuities are quoted in years ranging from one to 10 . -RRB- The most common are three , five and seven year fixed annuities . If -LRB- read : when -RRB- interest rates rise from abnormally low rates to abnormally high rates , it could be a wise time to allocate some of one 's fixed income exposure to a fixed annuity . And unlike a CDthe interest from which is paid out and taxed annuallythe interest or gains earned in annuities are deferred until distributions are taken . Many annuities promise some level of principal protection . Even in certain variable products -LRB- invested in equities -RRB- , a portion of your principal or even future income may be guaranteed by the company . The advantages of equity indexed annuities are , frankly , hard to find amidst the overly-simplistic marketing pledges shrouding their overly-complex underlying construction . ... Whoever sells you the policy will likely be going on a nice vacation sooncommissions on these products range into double-digit percentages . Additionally , you could suspend disbelief and allow yourself to think you 're getting the upside of the market without any downside . Ignorance can be blissful , if only momentarily . Cons Unfortunately for each of the pros , there are pretty significant cons . At this time , prevailing interest rates -LRB- and correspondingly the rates used to calculate immediate annuity payouts -RRB- are so low that committing funds could expose you to a meaningful amount of inflation risk . So even if you 're predisposed to lock in a more secure income stream with an immediate annuity , consider waiting until rates normalize . The same could be said for most fixed annuities . The tax deferral of annuities is worth something , but there 's a priceor prices , reallyto be paid . All of your gains will be taxed at your ordinary income rate . Especially if you 're investing in a variable annuity with equity exposure , you 're trading the tax privilege of capital gains for a ratedeferred or notthat could be twice as much . Another negative tax implication is the loss of a `` step-up '' in cost basis to your heirs . Capital assets that were purchased at a low costlike stocks and real estate , for exampleare afforded a step-up in their cost basis upon your death . If you sold those assets during life , you 'd paid capital gains tax . If you gave them to your heirs while you were alive , your heirs would inherit your cost basis . But if you wait to pass them to heirs until after your death , they will receive a step-up in their basis to the cost of the holding on your date of death . Annuities with significant appreciation , however , receive no such benefit . In fact , not only will your heirs inherit your cost basis , they 'll be paying tax at their ordinary income rate and may be forced to distribute the policy and take that gain in short order , resulting in a tax time bomb for those you hope to bless with an inheritance . There are more pros and cons - please visit my website or call me to discuss your particular situation .
Lifetime annuities are annuities that pay the annuitants monthly payments for the rest of their lives . The annuity can be an immediate annuity , where a lump sum is used to purchase the annuity , and payments begin right away . Or they can be deferred annuities , where money is put into the annuity over a number of years before the annuity is annuitized . The annuity can be fixed , with guaranteed fixed payments . Or it can be variable , which may generate higher or lower payments than a fixed annuity . When the annuitant dies , the payments of a lifetime annuity end . If the annuity holder lives longer than expected , they can do very well with a lifetime annuity . If they live a shorter than expected , that is not favorable to the annuity holder . However , some contracts allow payment of an amount equal to the initial investment to the beneficiary .
The safest annuities available would be fixed annuities . These annuities make fixed payments to the annuitant for the life of the contract . How the annuity is structured is very important . You have a number of options to choose from when creating the annuity that will influence your monthly distributions . If the policy is set up to only make payments while you are living -LRB- a single-life annuity -RRB- , then once you die the payments cease and whatever funds were paid into the annuity are not returned . You can also structure the distributions to continue until the spouse dies -LRB- a joint life annuity -RRB- . Another structure or to force payments to continue for a specified number of years -LRB- and go to a tertiary beneficiary - e.g. your kids -RRB- . The drawback of a period certain annuity is you can run the risk of outliving the annuity -LRB- e.g. you 're 65 years old and you have a 15 year period certain annuity that makes payments to you until age 80 . If you live to 81 , you will no longer have those funds to depend on each month . -RRB- . It 's important to consult with an experienced , independent annuity broker who can discuss your situation with you on a personal level and help you create an annuity that will best serve your needs . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Are we talking about fixed or variable ? I 'll assume fixed , so here goes ... Annuities , for a 5 year old : Do you know how a CD works ? An annuity is the same thing , just with a longer time until you get your money back . CD 's are issued by banks , Annuities are issued by insurance companies . Interest from CD 's are taxed each year while interest from annuities are not taxed until you take the money . Does this sound like a retirement account ? Yup , the IRS thinks so too . If you take money out before they want you to , you 're penalized 10 % -LRB- stupid government -RRB- . The longer the term , the higher the interest you should expect . CD for 12 months = low interest Annuity for 10 years = slightly more interest . Were you referring to variable annuities ? Think mutual fund account with higher fees -LRB- generally -RRB- . Now , riders ... no 5 year old would ever understand these ... except income riders . Here 's the deal : You get X percent of the balance of the account , paid to you for the rest of your life ... even if the account balance is $ 0.00 . What ? I still get paid when there 's no money left ? Yup ! That , my 5 year old friend , is an annuity -LRB- with an in come rider -RRB- . There 's a lot more to it than that . I could write a book on annuities -LRB- and many people have -RRB- . Make sure you work with a competent advisor who can speak your language . If they keep babbling about terms you do n't understand , move on and find someone else to work with .
The most important concept to understand when it comes to retirement planning is that it is a process of shifting consumption . The decision that must be made is how much am I going to consume today and how much do I need tomorrow . In todays low interest environment this question is easier to understand . In order to have $ 100 a month in retirement , I have to defer consumption of a certain amount today , depending upon my age and years to retirement . Once it is clear in our minds that retirement planning isnt about beating the stock market , winning a jackpot , or winning a national lottery , we can address the issue of how to shift those funds that represent our deferred consumption . The best place to start is with an advisor who will listen to you and communicate clearly with you . That advisor will be careful to measure your risk tolerance . The advisor doesnt want you staying awake at night worrying about losing money in your retirement plan , which is what happened to many in 2008 . The advisor will ask a battery of questions that measure your expectations and compares that with your willingness to experience loss . Eventually a picture will emerge that will give the advisor a snapshot of your current thinking about investing . The good adviser will continue reviewing your risk tolerance throughout the period of time that investment advice is being given . The advisor will take that information and compile recommendations of funds that would be suitable to help you meet your objectives and yet are sufficiently diversified to offer a degree of protection for the assets that you will invest . The adviser will offer you choices . He may suggest that these assets be held in a variable annuity . The annuity has certain features that might be important to you . The variable annuity will frequently feature both fixed and variable options . The variable annuity will usually allow you to shift assets as your risk tolerance changes . For example , at age 60 after several years of having a variable annuity , you might experience a windfall , perhaps a legacy . You might want to become more aggressive with your variable annuity . You will be able to shift funds to accomplish this change easily . If later reverses make you more tentative , you can return your funds into fixed or very conservative options . This ability to shift is an important feature of the variable annuity . Ultimately the results of the annuity will be a function of the options which you select . While that might seem daunting , in fact , if you selected funds in your comfort zone you will most likely be pleased with the results . The main point is the process of shifting those dollars from current consumption to future consumption . When you start spending them you will not remember how much of a return you made in a given year . The variable annuity also has the benefit of being an annuity . That means that you can select to receive your money in retirement as a life-long stream of income . The return on such an annuity can be remarkably high . The company will probably offer alternative distribution plans to meet your specific needs . There will probably be a survivor option so that your spouse could receive the balance of payments if you dont reach a specified age or havent exhausted the initial fund . Some companies that issue variable annuities will allow you to continue to manage your money in the annuitization process . Then the results wont be guaranteed and can rise and fall with the values of the underlying securities .
An indexed annuity was initially a method to make the market participation of a variable annuity available to the fixed and guaranteed marketplace . The appropriate name for a `` index annuity '' is an Equity Indexed Annuities -LRB- EIA -RRB- . The idea of a variable indexed annuity is unusual but Allianz actually is offering a product with the name `` Index Advantage Variable Annuity '' . According to the Securities and Exchange Commission , there are three types of annuities . There are fixed , indexed or variable annuities . The vast bulk of indexed annuities are not registered with the SEC and are therefore considered `` fixed '' . Without more information to help you 'll have to accept that an indexed annuity is probably a fixed product but some carriers are creating variable indexed annuities .
A variable annuity has features that make it an attractive purchase . A variable annuity is often seen as a hedge against the ravages of inflation . The time to buy a variable annuity is when you want to establish a long term savings program . Normally the objective of the program would be to accumulate money for retirement . You would consider a variable annuity if you were dissatisfied with the return offered on other annuities . The final consideration is to evaluate your risk tolerance to determine if a variable annuity is the correct contract for you . In order to purchase a variable annuity you must deal with a registered representative who holds a variable annuity license in your state . This agent receives additional supervision for your safety . This agent will provide you with a prospectus for any fund available in the variable annuity The primary feature or a variable annuity is that the contract is an annuity . An annuity can provide an income that you can not outlive . This feature can be different in various variable annuities but the fact that a lifetime income is available is extremely important . Another feature that would make a variable annuity attractive is that there isnt any taxation on gain during the accumulation period of the annuity . The gain is reinvested inside the annuity and this compounding effect is very important . A variable annuity unlike other annuities is not based upon interest , rather it is based upon the performance of underlying investment accounts which you may tailor to suit your specific needs and interests . You are normally granted the right to transfer between investment options without triggering income taxes . Many of these transfers also avoid any fees . There are risks associated with investing in a variable annuity , including loss of principal . A variable annuity is flexible . It can be changed throughout the accumulation period to meet your specific requirements . You risk tolerance can change over time . The variable annuity will allow you to change the mix of investments held by the variable annuity . If you become apprehensive about the market , there is almost always a fixed account to provide steady interest without fear of loss . There are fees associated with a variable annuity that are not always found in other annuities . These fees reflect the fact that the value of the annuity is invested , rather than merely earning interest . There are opportunities in most variable annuities to shift from fund to fund and to shift from variable funds to fixed funds . Normally there arent any fees for this service . Like most annuities surrender fees may be applicable . This is because of the long term nature of the contract and can be understood when compared to the early withdrawal penalties that are a part of certificates of deposit . These surrender fees are often waived in the event of disability . Like other annuities the variable annuity allows you to select a beneficiary . Many variable annuities provide for a guaranteed minimum death benefit that provides some safeguards for your family should you retire before you retire . The death benefit from the annuity would pass by contract to the beneficiary in the event of death avoiding probate expense and delay . Many variable annuities will return the amount of deposits as a death benefit should the value of the annuity be less .
Companies which offer Fixed Annuities & Fixed Indexed Annuities make money in several different strategies depending on the product . Some annuities have caps . The company will make money from interest earned over the cap . Other annuity products have spreads or fees meaning they will take a % which is set at the time the contract is taken . Others will have participation rates meaning you participate or get a % of the interest which was earned . There are a few other ways as well . if you have a specific question about an annuity you are looking at , do not hesitate to call your Broker or reach out to me .
The rate of return of annuities really depends on what type of annuity you are talking about . Fixed Annuities have a set base rate similar to a CD , they pay a guaranteed rates of interest . If you are looking for a fixed annuity make sure you shop around some companies like Fidelity & Guaranty Life and Guaranty Income Life are raising their base rates . When you are looking at Index Annuities the insurance company gives you a guaranteed minimum interest rate and also a crediting strategy like the S&P 500 or something like that . Think of it this way there are two buckets of money , the first has your money with the guaranteed interest rate , the second has your money linked to the crediting strategy of the market . If the market goes up they will credit that bucket with interest -LRB- every company has different participation rates and caps -RRB- . If the market is down then that bucket will earn no interest . When ever you want to start drawing an income , the insurance company will see which bucket has the most money and that bucket will be used for income . If you work with a good broker , they have software that will show you what your investment will look like with all of the companies . Please let me know if I can help in any way .
Annuities are very complex . Selecting the best annuity is a function of needs . At their core annuities provide a lifetime of uninterrupted income . Nothing else can guarantee that result . It takes the risk of outliving your money off the table . The single premium annuities are the basis upon which every other annuity is developed . Development of annuities has followed two general lines . The first is the accumulation of money and the second is the distribution of money . Annuities can be funded with a single premium or a flexible series of premiums . Since the Internal Revenue Code recognizes the value of annuities the growth that the money placed in an annuity experiences is not subject to current income taxes . These deferred tax plans can have powerful advantages over alternative investments . Annuities can earn income in a variety of ways . Some are guaranteed while others are not . Some have guaranteed rates and also allow that the rate can increase as market conditions make that possible . There are many schemes to determine interest rates but many contracts guarantee a minimum rate below which they will not fall . Annuities are often sold with interest bonuses for a specified period of time . These bonuses are inducements to purchase the annuity but are often tied to the surrender period of the contract . Since an annuity is a long term cash accumulation plan withdrawing money early from the contract is subject to surrender charges over a specified period of time in most contracts . There are a number of ways benefits can be paid under annuities because there are a wide variety of needs . The traditional way is in a lifetime flow of regular payments . When a person is concerned that they might make a deposit and then die shortly afterwards there are options that can be selected that make payments for a specified period of time to either the annuitant or beneficiary . Others make lifetime payments as long as one of two people is alive . There are even options that make lifetime payments as long as one of two people are alive but will pay a beneficiary if both die prior to the end of a certain period of time . In addition to options that provide a benefit for a period certain , there are also similar options for return of deposit . There are annuities that defer the payment of the benefit for an extended period of time . The advantage of this type of annuity as that you are able to purchase an amount of money that wont be delivered for a long time and all that growth and interest is being deferred from current income tax . These policies can make a tremendous increase in income and may be used to offset anticipated cost of living increases . Annuities come with several riders that guarantee various aspects of the contract . When the cash value of the annuity isnt guaranteed you can purchase a rider that will pay a specified lifetime income even if the account balance is exhausted . Annuities are complicated and there are companies trying new ideas every day . You will probably find that there is an annuity that will play an important role in your retirement income planning .
Fixed Index Annuities -LRB- FIA 's -RRB- are annuities that have the security of a guaranteed interest rate along with the potential to earn more based on the performance of a market index or indexes . Fixed Index Annuities are often interchanged with the term Equity Indexed Annuities , but FIA 's can be tied to indexes other than the stock market . The premium for a Fixed Index Annuity can go in as a simply payment or be paid over time . The potential for growth in an Indexed Annuity is greater than a Fixed Annuity due to the participation in the indexes . However , it maintains the security of the guaranteed interest rate of a Fixed Annuity .
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Will Medicare Pay For Non Emergency Transportation ?
Medicare can pay for non-emergency transportation if that form of transportation is needed to prevent endangerment of your health , and if you need to be transported to a place where your health can be diagnosed or treated . You might also be able to have Medicare cover non emergency transportation if you are confined to bed and that is the only way that you can be transported to get the medical care you need .
Medicare Part B covers emergency ambulance transport to a hospital when you 're unable to be transported by other means -LRB- e.g. car or a taxi -RRB- or your need medical care during transport . The ambulance must take you to the nearest medical facility -LRB- generally a hospital -RRB- that can provide you care . In some instances , you may be able to get covered ambulance transportation in a non-emergency situation if you meet certain conditions -LRB- e.g. your doctor deems its medically necessary , traveling to a medical facility by other means would put your health at risk - you may want to check with Medicare to get full specifics on what conditions are required to be covered in a non-emergency setting where transportation by ambulance is needed -RRB- .
Medicare covers ambulance rides when they are used for emergency situations and medically necessary to transport the patient to the nearest facility for care , and when other transportation would endanger the patient 's health . The ambulance must be Medicare approved . Medicare may cover ambulance rides for non-emergency services if there is a written note from the doctor stating that such transportation is needed to not endanger the patient 's health . Instances where ambulance may be approved for non-emergency situations are for treatment for end stage renal disease , transportation to the doctor when the patient is bedridden , and when there is need for the medical services offered on the ambulance while making the trip .
Medicare can pay for non-emergency transportation if that form of transportation is needed to prevent endangerment of your health , and if you need to be transported to a place where your health can be diagnosed or treated . You might also be able to have Medicare cover non emergency transportation if you are confined to bed and that is the only way that you can be transported to get the medical care you need .
Ambulance services would be covered under Medicare Part B , not Part A - the ambulance services would be covered in emergency situations and other means of transportation are unavailable/endanger the health of the individual.The ambulance must take you to the nearest medical facility -LRB- generally a hospital -RRB- that can provide you care . In some instances , you may be able to get covered ambulance transportation in a non-emergency situation if you meet certain conditions -LRB- e.g. your doctor deems its medically necessary , traveling to a medical facility by other means would put your health at risk - you may want to check with Medicare to get full specifics on what conditions are required to be covered in a non-emergency setting where transportation by ambulance is needed -RRB- . Please feel free to contact me if you have any otherquestions . Thanks very much .
In short , Medicare will not pay anything for non-emergency transportation - ambulatory services are covered in emergencies . However , Part B can provide some benefits for nonemergency ambulance transportation between home and a hospital if the patient 's doctor certifies IN WRITING that transportation in something other than an ambulance would endanger their health . Confirm with your doctor and Medicare first to make sure you would n't get stuck with the bill in this situation .
There are many types of travel insurance plans from trip interruption due to an illness or emergency to medical or accidental death while traveling . Like any insurance policy it is a transference of risk . If you are taking a $ 10,000 family vacation and $ 8,000 is already paid as non refundable and if you had an emergency and had to cancel last minute and you would not miss the $ 8,000 , do n't buy insurance . However , if you or a family member were to become ill or injured in a foreign country , could you pay the tens of thousands of dollars it may cost for stabilization care and emergency medical transport . Most people could not . The cost of travel insurance for medical care and emergency evacuation or medical transport back home to the US is almost nothing compared to the risk of cost . My answer would be yes every time .
Medicare covers emergency ambulance transportation when you need to be transported to a hospital or a skilled nursing facility . Keep in mind this transportation is when you 've had a medical emergency and your health is in serious danger and you cant be safely transported by a car or taxi . Medicare coverage depends on the seriousness of your medical condition and whether you could have been safely transported by other means . Medicare will only cover ambulance services to the nearest medical facility that can give you the care you need .
Medicare covers ground ambulance transportation when you need to be transported to a hospital , critical access hospital , or skilled nursing facility for MEDICALLY NECCESARY services , and transportation in any other vehicle could endanger your health . Medicare MAY pay for emergency ambulance transportation in an airplane or helicopter to a hospital if you need immediate and rapid ambulance transportation that ground ambulance ca n't provide . You pay 20 % of the Medicare-approved amount , and the Part B deductible applies . - Medicare & You 2013 -
Most true major medical insurance plans cover emergency medical transport which would include both ground and air -LRB- helicopter -RRB- transport . Use of an air ambulance is usually a call made by onsite medical personnel , not at the request of the patient . One thing to keep in mind is this . Air transport is quite expensive -LRB- $ 7000 + -RRB- and often the transport company will be non-par -LRB- not in any network -RRB- .
Under Part B of Medicare ambulance services are covered . Medicare will cover 80 % of your ambulance ride if it is a medical emergency and every second counts getting you to a hospital for treatment . There are some non-emergency reasons that Medicare will cover an ambulance ride . If Medicare disagrees with your decision to use an ambulance you will be responsible for 100 % of the charges . In other words do not use an ambulance as an alternate method of transportation if it is not a medical emergency .
Medicare Part B pays for ambulance use when needed for an emergency , when used to transport the Medicare patient to a hospital or skilled nursing facility for necessary care , and when traveling another way would be dangerous to the health of the patient . Medicare will pay for non emergency ambulance use in some cases if ordered by the doctor .
Medicare itself does not cover transportation other than an emergency ambulance ride . A small number of Medicare Advantage HMO plans offer limited transportation . It is becoming more common for major doctor groups to offer transportation to their Medicare clients . Do n't be afraid to ask the next time you schedule a visit . ALSO - some states have special transportation setups for those on Medicaid . Again , ask .
Ambulance rides , or any other emergency medical transportation , including vehicles equipped for land , air or sea , may be covered by your health plan . Coverage may vary from plan to plan and may be subject to your deductibles and coinsurance . Also , whether your ambulance service provider is considered in network or out of network may also affect your coverage . There may also be restrictions on whether or not the transportation is deemed medically necessary or not . If the service provided was deemed not medically necessary , or does not meet the definition of medical necessity , you may be responsible for the full amount of the service provided . If you have received emergency ambulance services and receive a bill , be sure to submit it to your health insurance company to seek payment or reimbursement . Also , there could be a limit , or cap , to what your insurance company may pay . So even if you do have coverage , you may still be responsible for a portion of the bill even after your deductible and coinsurance is paid . Be sure to read your Medical Policy , usually a booklet or pamphlet that your health insurance provider sends with your policy . If you do not have one , call the Customer Service Number , or many companies have the information online .
Medicare does not pay for rent or amenities in privately funded assisted living communities . Considered non-medical senior housing , Medicare will not pay for your rent , meals , or anything not deemed as medical . If you have Medicare , you can still use it for your medical needs . You may be able to receive some covered services at an assisted care facility for preventative or acute care or medical emergency -LRB- therapies , medical supplies , equipment use , dietary counseling and ambulance transportation -RRB- . Thank you for taking the time to read my response . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance .
Medicare will cover ambulance transport when your situation is considered medically necessary and any other form of transportation would be a danger to your health . Medicare will only cover the cost of transport to the closest facility that is able to treat your condition . Be aware that non-par providers are allowed to balance bill above the Medicare allowance .
Medicare Part B covers most outpatient treatment that Medicare considers medically necessary . Just a few of your covered expenses include doctor visits , lab work , X-rays , CT scans , MRI , medical transport -LRB- ambulance -RRB- , Emergency Room , outpatient surgery , infusion therapy in a clinic or hospital setting . Some infusion drugs are also covered by Part B.
Yes . The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
The benefits under each individual health plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does A Mother 's Health Insurance Cover A Newborn ?
If the mother notifies her health insurance carrier on a timely basis , usually within 30 days of the birth , the newborn should have coverage under the mother 's health insurance plan . Check your policy for the exact notification time frame . Once approved , the coverage should begin at birth even though you are notifying the carrier after the fact .
If a group health plan , health insurance company , or health maintenance organization -LRB- HMO -RRB- provides maternity benefits , it may not restrict benefits for a hospital stay in connection with childbirth to less than 48 hours following a vaginal delivery or 96 hours following a delivery by cesarean section.You can not be required to obtain preauthorization from your plan in order for your 48-hour or 96-hour stay to be covered . -LRB- However , certain requirements that you give notice to the plan of the pregnancy or the childbirth may apply . -RRB- The law allows you and your baby to be released earlier than these time periods only if the attending provider decides , after consulting with you , that you or your baby can be discharged earlier.In any case , the attending provider can not receive incentives or disincentives to discharge you or your child earlier than 48 hours -LRB- or 96 hours -RRB- . If your state has a law that provides similar hospital stay protections and your plan offers coverage through an insurance policy or HMO , then you may be protected under state law rather than under the Newborns and Mothers Health Protection Act . Health insurance policies will generally cover a new born as long as you enroll your newborn within 30 days of birth . Coverage should be effective as of your babys birth date , just remember , you should enroll your baby within 30 days of the date of birth.Contact your health plan or your spouses health plan as soon as possible to find out how to enroll your new baby in group health plan coverage .
If the mother notifies her health insurance carrier on a timely basis , usually within 30 days of the birth , the newborn should have coverage under the mother 's health insurance plan . Check your policy for the exact notification time frame . Once approved , the coverage should begin at birth even though you are notifying the carrier after the fact .
Maternity leave is the time taken off of work to delivery your baby and care for your newborn during it 's first weeks of life . Short Term Disability insurance is the type of coverage that covers that time off by paying the new mother part of your regular wages . It is also called `` sick leave '' by some businesses .
Yes , you can . What kind of health insurance you can get your newborn will depend upon your circumstances but your ability to qualify for and to be offered coverage are guaranteed by law now . If you or your spouse are employed and have health insurance through your employer then you may want to add the child as a dependent on your group coverage . Your child can also qualify for an individual health insurance policy that is guaranteed to be issued and that can not have any pre-existing conditions limits or exclusions . And , depending upon your income level , your newborn may qualify for health coverage under government programs such as the Children 's Health Insurance Program -LRB- CHIP -RRB- or Medicaid . Whichever way you go to get health insurance coverage for your newborn get the child enrolled within 30-days of their birth .
This is a very common question . The answer is yes . Let me give you an example of what one of my clients did . It was very thoughtful . My client is a woman in her 30s . She is very devoted to her mother , who is in her 60s . Her mother took great care of her when she was growing up , and now she wanted to pay your mother back . She makes sure her mother lacks for nothing . She bought her a house , and pays her monthly bills . She bought her a car . She treats her to vacations . Her whole attitude is that my mother took great care of me , and now that I have the money , Im going to take great care of her . Of course , all the money she is spending now on her mother , is money she can not spend on herself and her own future . She is basically depleting her retirement fund for her mothers care . She came to me and basically said that she would like to get reimbursed at some point for the money she is spending on her mother . She will happily provide for her mother as long as a mother is alive ; however , when she dies , she would like to have an insurance benefit paid to her to replenish her own retirement fund . The goal was to get a life insurance company to offer a policy on her mother for that reason . And I did it . It took some digging , but I did find a life insurance company to buy into that concept . They did set a limit on the face amount , but it was reasonable as far as what my client wanted to accomplish . Certainly a win-win situation .
Health insurance on newborn 's is pretty much the same as for any age child . Most policies will cover the child from birth if they are added on to the parents policy within the specified time frame -LRB- usually 30 days -RRB- . The health insurance plan will cover injury or illness of the newborn as well as most routine check ups and inoculations
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . The notion of getting peace of mind with insurance comes from the direct purpose of buying insurance - protecting yourself from a catastrophic financial event by shifting the risk to a third party -LRB- the insurance company -RRB- . When it comes to health insurance , you know you 're only exposed to such a high amount in a given year - known as an annual out-of-pocket maximum . Other than your premium , you will not pay more in healthcare expenses than this amount in a given year . A great example of when you might encounter a very expensive financial event for health insurance purposes is surgeries .
Yes , Suze Orman recommends long-term care insurance . In fact , she is the primary caregiver for her mother who lives with her in Florida . In an article written forSun Times Media , LLC , dated Sept. 4 , 2012 , she relates how difficult it has been taking care of her mother . Although Suze Orman had - and still has - the means from her business to take care of the costs of long-term care insurance , she reports that she tried and tried to get her mother to sign off on an LTCi application , but she refused to do it . Her mother said she would n't ever need it and that it would be a waste ofmoney . It costs approximately $ 25,000 / month for Suze to keep her mother at home and have the best quality care around the clock . That 's about average for 24/7 home care with skilled nursing . If Suze 's mom were to go into a Nursing Facility , the cost would be much less , but would still be from $ 7,000 - $ 12,000 per month , depending on whether she had a semi-private or private room . Suze indicated that as a young professional financial advisor , she saw `` clients who would spend all the money that they had earned over a lifetime on a long-term care stay . '' She advised that , `` If you can afford LTC insurance and you are in your early 50s or older , now is the time to look into getting it . '' But , she also cautions that if you ca n't , '' ... dont buy it because you will end up dropping it and wasting your money . '' She concludes her article with the irony of her own personal situation with regard to buying long-term care insurance . `` Over the years , I have had some health problems that are fine today . But , when I went to get my own LTC insurance policy two years ago I was denied for recent health reasons . If I had just gone one year earlier , that would not have been the case . '' -LRB- Suze Orman donated her fee for writing the article to Blue Planet Network , which aims to bring sustainable safe drinking water to people in rural communities around the world ; blueplanetnetwork.org . -RRB-
You should add your newborn to your health insurance policy within 30 days of birth . Most policies will automatically cover any newborn baby during those first thirty days . Many children are born with health issues that require ongoing care . If you add your child during the thirty day period there will be no interruption in coverage . Birth of a child is a qualifying life event . This means you can change your plan outside of open enrollment . However if you wait too long you may have a gap in coverage until the next open enrollment period arrives .
The benefits under each individual health plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
Under the affordable care act , a core of 10 essential health benefits must be met under each marketplace health plan on or off the exchanges . One of these benefits is maternity and newborn care . This includes care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies .
Yes . The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
The benefits under each plan varies by company and metal level -LRB- bronze , silver , gold , and platinum - there 's also a catastrophic plan available to individuals under age 30 -RRB- . However , every plan has a set of 10 essential health benefits that they must meet , but carriers have the option to offer coverage above and beyond the essential benefits -LRB- the metal level is the big indicator on that -RRB- . The essential health benefits that every plan must meet are : 1 -RRB- Ambulatory Patient Services Health care services without being admitted to a hospital -LRB- e.g. visiting a doctors office or a clinic , home health services , and hospice care some plans may limit home health and hospice care benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 2 -RRB- Emergency Services Care of conditions requiring immediate treatment -LRB- typically at an emergency room -RRB- , including ambulance transportation . You also cant be penalized for going to an out-of-network hospital . 3 -RRB- Hospitalization Care provided during a hospital visit , including services provided by doctors , nurses , and other hospital staff , medical tests , medications given during your stay , as well as room and board . Care received in a skilled nursing facility is also included in hospitalization coverage -LRB- note : some plans limit skilled nursing facility benefits to no more than 45 days -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Laboratory Services Tests a doctor completes to help diagnose an injury , illness , or other medical condition , or to monitor the progress of a treatment . Some preventative screenings may be fully covered . 5 -RRB- Maternity and Newborn Care Care women receive during pregnancy , including prenatal care , in labor , delivery and post-delivery , and care for newborn babies . 6 -RRB- Mental Health Services and Addiction Treatment Inpatient and Outpatient care that evaluates , diagnoses , and treats mental health conditions and substance abuse disorders -LRB- some plans may limit coverage to 20 days per year -RRB- . 7 -RRB- Rehabilitative Services & Devices Rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices to help regain mental and physical skills that were lost due to injury , disability , or a chronic condition . Each plan has to provide 30 visits per year for physical or occupational therapy , speech therapy , cardiac or pulmonary rehabilitation , and chiropractor visits . 8 -RRB- Pediatric Services Care provided to children , including vaccines and immunizations . For children under the age of 19 , dental and vision care must be offered this includes two routine dental exams , an eye exam and corrective lenses each year . 9 -RRB- Prescription Drugs Medications prescribed by a doctor to treat a medical condition or illness . At least one prescription drug must be covered in each category and classification . 10 -RRB- Preventive and Wellness Services and Chronic Disease Treatment care includes physicals , immunizations , and certain types of screenings designed to prevent or detect certain medical conditions as well as care for chronic conditions such as diabetes and asthma .
Most carriers require you to notify them of a newborn within 31 days of birth . If you go beyond that point they have the option of requiring medical evidence of insurability . If you are adding the child to a group health insurance plan your HR department can advise you . It could be anywhere from $ 100 to $ 300 per month . Adding a newborn to an individual plan is $ 100 and up . Ask your agent or existing carrier for a rate .
Congratulations on your newborn -LRB- or newborn to be -RRB- in the family ! You will be able to get life insurance on the baby when he or she is about 15 days old . It will cost approx $ 3 to $ 10 per month for $ 10,000 of Whole Life . The rate depends on the gender of the baby , and also on the life insurance company , and features of the policy you get .
In addition to Jason 's excellent advice to meet with the selling agent to find out the detailed workings of the policy , another option is for your mother 's children to continue to pay the premiums assuming that they are listed as the beneficiaries . The policy might be an excellent buy and worth keeping until your mother passes . And if you ca n't afford to keep all of that policy in-force , reducing coverage or selling part of the policy to an investor for cash -LRB- called `` life settlement '' -RRB- is also a viable option worth looking into . Survivorship policies that are designed to pay only after the 2nd spouse has passed are usually sold in high amounts and thus are very expensive . You should definitely educate yourself on what your mother owns and come to know every option open to your family before letting that policy lapse .
Unless you purchased your health insurance before March 23 , 2010 your health insurance will change under Obamacare . Obamacare requires that all health insurance sold after January 1 , 2014 include 10 essential health insurance benefits . In addition there are a number of new taxes and fees that will be added to the cost of your policy which will raise the cost by approximately $ 25 per month per insured person . These are the 10 new essential health benefits : 1 . Outpatient care : the kind you get without being admitted to a hospital 2 . Emergency services 3 . Treatment in the hospital for inpatient care 4 . Maternity and newborn care 5 . Mental health and substance use disorder services 6 . Prescription drugs 7 . Rehabilitative services and devices including physical and occupational therapy , speech-language pathology and psychiatric rehabilitation 8 . Laboratory services -LRB- limited -RRB- 9 . Preventive and wellness services and chronic disease management 10 . Pediatric services , including dental and vision care
Health insurance policies will generally cover a new born as long as you enroll your newborn within 30 days of birth . Coverage should be effective as of your babys birth date , just remember , you should enroll your baby within 30 days of the date of birth.Contact your health plan or your spouses health plan as soon as possible to find out how to enroll your new baby in group health plan coverage .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Happens When You Stop Paying Life Insurance ?
Life insurance is a contract . Term life insurance is a contract based on the exchange of premiums for coverage . If you stop paying premiums and youre past the reinstatement period , youve lost coverage and may be required to re-qualify for coverage . Permanent forms of life insurance with accumulated cash values may be able to sustain the policy without premiums for a time . To determine if your policy will continue without payments , order an in force ledger from your company . In your request for an in force ledger , ask them to illustrate the nonpayment of premiums under current policy expenses . This will give you an idea how long the policy will stay in force .
The answer is as simple or complicated as the policy you have . With a simple term policy , it will lapse , after entering into your grace period . Term with Return of Premium , generally will not lapse until the cash value the ROP has been exhausted . Many clients will use a return of premium term to `` pay up '' their policy so they do not have to pay for all the years . With Whole Life or UL the cash value in the policy will pay the premiums until exhausted . Whole Life may provide you with a ` paid up ' option however so if you do have to stop paying premiums , you can still get a death benefit although it will be smaller than whet your initial death benefit was .
With Term life insurance , if you stop paying premiums for over one month , the policy will lapse . To get that same policy back you have to fill out a reinstatement application saying that your health has not changed , and you have to pay back premiums to when you quit paying them . If your health has changed or you are unable/unwilling to pay that amount , you will need to apply for a new policy . There is no cash value and no surrender charge . When you stop paying the premium for cash value product such as Whole life or Universal life , the cash in the policy may pay the premiums until the cash value runs out . If you would rather take the cash value out in cash , or roll it over into another policy , or change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , you must contact your agent or the life insurance company and give them those instructions .
That depends on the policy type . In most cases though the policy will be cancelled . Some policy 's like universal life and some whole life policies may allow you to miss a payment without cancellations . If you just missed your payment date by a few days and it is the first time that you have missed a payment . I would contact your agent to see if the policy could be re-instated . Please remember every policy is different . Read your policy completely to know what coverage you have and what exclusions there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Some people use the term `` stop loss '' to mean `` maximum out-of-pocket exposures '' which is the point in a person 's health insurance policy when they 've met their deductible and any co-insurance cost sharing and the health insurance carrier becomes 100 % responsible for all health care costs after that point . Technically this is an incorrect use of the term . Stop loss traditionally refers to reinsurance arrangements within self-insured group health insurance plans . There are two types of stop loss insurance , specific and aggregate . Specific stop loss insurance protects the group plan from claims exposure above a certain point for any insured person in the group . For example , a $ 50,000 specific stop loss policy means the employer accepts the risk for the first $ 50,000 in claims on an individual and after that point the reinsurance carrier pays the rest of the cost . Aggregate stop loss insurance protects the employer from claims liability for the entire insured group above a certain point . A $ 1 million aggregate stop loss policy means the employer accepts the liability for the first $ 1 million in claims for their entire insured group , if the group 's claims exceed this limit then the aggregate reinsurance carrier pays the rest of the cost .
How about today ? There are many creative ways to fund your life insurance policy . Lets suppose you have term insurance with 10 years left on the premium guarantee . You could , of course , just keep paying the premium for those 10 years . If the carrier doesnt get those 10 years of premium payments , you will lose the coverage . Is there any way you could stop paying but still retain the guarantee ? Yes , there is . You might be able to use a single premium immediate annuity to fund the policy . Make one payment into the annuity , and the annuity will , in turn , pay your insurance premium for you . Depending on your age and other factors , the amount of money you put into that annuity could very well be substantially less than the total premium you would end up paying for the next 10 years . This way you could stop making premium payments after that one annuity contribution , but still retain your guaranteed coverage . Now lets suppose you have a universal life policy . I am sure you know that this is a flexible premium product . You could overpay , underpay , and even stop paying . Of course , you need to know what you are doing here to make sure you will have the coverage you need for as long as you need it . Given that , you might be able to plop one lump sum into that policy now and never have to make another payment and still get the guarantees you want . All you need is for the carrier to do a simple calculation and illustration for you . Here again , you could stop making payments but still retain the coverage . There are many ways to skin a cat , as they say . Not that I think cats should be skinned at all - but you know what I mean :-RRB-
This depends on what is happening with the annuity when someone dies and what type of annuity -LRB- owner or annuitant driven -RRB- we 're talking about . For an annuity that is not paying income and the owner is the annuitant -LRB- i.e. the type of contract wo n't matter -RRB- , the cash value of the annuity will be paid to the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- in the contract . If the annuity have been annuitized -LRB- i.e. is paying an income stream -RRB- the chosen option will determine what happens . For life only annuity payments , the payments will stop and no further money will be paid out . For period certain annuities , the income will continue until the period certain has ended . For life with a refund -LRB- installment or lump sum cash -RRB- than the refund will pay the the named beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- until the cash value of the annuity has been paid out in full to the beneficiary -LRB- ies -RRB- .
A stop loss means exactly what it implies , `` it stops your loss '' and the insurance carrier picks up all other costs during that calendar year . For individuals that have health insurance a stop loss is also known as the annual out-of-pocket maximum . After you reach the out-of-pocket maximum in a calendar year the insurance carrier pays the rest of the claims . In a self-insurance situation where a company pays the claims up to a certain dollar amount the `` stop loss '' is the most the employer will pay in any year after which the insurance carrier will pay the remaining claims .
Life insurance has cash value under the circumstances below . The thing is that depending on how you manage that cash , it can be a blessing or a curse . Whole life has cash value when the company pays dividends . These are not guaranteed , but are typically paid . Over time , they can add up . But once you use that tempting loan provision , that cash value not only goes down but so does the death benefit . Better make sure you can deal with that . Universal life has cash value when the company applies a high enough interest rate to the policy account . That can be higher than a lot of conservative instruments out there . But you can take cash out of the policy . And , you can stop paying premiums , or under pay , if you want . What do you think will happen if the interest rate goes down and you deplete the policy of cash ? It will die an ugly death . So be careful .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
With Term life insurance , if you stop paying premiums for over one month , the policy will lapse . To get that same policy back you have to fill out a reinstatement application saying that your health has not changed , and you have to pay back premiums to when you quit paying them . If your health has changed or you are unable/unwilling to pay that amount , you will need to apply for a new policy . There is no cash value and no surrender charge . When you stop paying the premium for cash value product such as Whole life or Universal life , the cash in the policy may pay the premiums until the cash value runs out . If you would rather take the cash value out in cash , or roll it over into another policy , or change your policy to a reduced paid up policy , you must contact your agent or the life insurance company and give them those instructions .
I am puzzled by your statement `` one can not damage their own property and submit a claim '' . What happens then if someone runs a stop sign or a red light and hits another car and the guilty party is charged with failure to yield right of way '' . This scenario probably happens once a day in every state and I was unaware that West Virginia has such out of touch insurance laws . I thought the driver could have his company , subject to the deductible , repair his car . The real question in your scenario is the school district best advised to file a claim because their Commercial policy is going to have to pay the claim on both sides of the equation , Also , the driver of the bus has no legal standing because he is driving the school district bus with the permission of the school district but the school district has the right to file or not to file
You need disability insurance as `` paycheck protection '' . You should look at your current monthly budget and determine what needs to be covered if you were to lose your paycheck due to an accident or illness . 1 in 4 20 year olds will go on disability before they retire from work . You should look at the your expenses and determine what is the net amount of income that I could get by on . Many people have disability insurance through their employeer . You have to be careful because this policy is usually paid `` pretex '' and is taxed upon your drawing income . You need to check your employeers policy to determine what your benefits are for disability . Business Owners can get a disability policy to pay for their business income . What would happen to your business if you could not do what you do daily to generate income . Would you need to hire somebody ? You can get a policy to cover this . Would your business stop working and revenue dries up ? You may be able to cover this . You need to work with an independent agent to compare the rates and benefits of multiple companies as they treat each situation different . An example would be a Physician who might be offered more income during their disability with a particular company . You would need to check to see if you receive benefits if you can not work your current profession versus working at anything . All paychecks need protection . You should have your evaluated and deceide how you would do if you became disabled .
Homeowners insurance is mandatory because the house is thecollateral on the debt that you owe the lender . If you did n't pay your mortgage then the bank has the right to foreclose on your property and sell it to recoup the money that they lent you . The lender protects their collateral by being listed on your homeowner policy as `` Loss Payee '' . -LRB- The one paid when a loss happens -RRB- . If their collateral -LRB- your home -RRB- burns up in a fire , and then someone stops paying their mortgage , they would have no asset and no mortgage payments coming in . Item of note : If you decide that you do n't want to have homeowners coverage on the home , the lender can add insurance -LRB- that only protects their interest in the home -RRB- and make you , the homeowner/mortgagee , pay for it on top of their mortgage payment . It is one of the many clauses that you initialed when you signed your mortgage agreement .
Great question ! There are a couple of things that you want to ask yourself before shopping for a policy . Ask yourself : What do I want this policy to do for me - provide burial expenses , transfer wealth to my survivors , provide a potential retirement income , or protect against a major expense like college or a mortgage ? How long will I need this coverage ? If you want it to last as long as you do , then you would want to look at a whole life policy instead of a term product . If you are looking to cover a short term risk , then a term policy is the better choice . Once you have an idea of what you want the insurance to do for you , figure out what you can afford to spend . Remember that life insurance is like buying a new car . You stop making timely payments , and one day your car is gone . The same thing happens to the money that you have paid into your policy . Find an independent agent , -LRB- one not tied to a specific brand -RRB- who can help you compare companies , policies , and what they will do for you.If you would like help , please feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to make time for you . Thanks for asking !
Stopping a term life insurance policy is fairly easy . The best and preferred way to stop coverage is to write your life insurance company requesting to cancel . All correspondence must be in writing to protect both parties , never just call and cancel . You will receive a confirmation . Most life insurance companies will allow you to reinstate , or change your mind , up to 180 days by paying back premiums . After that time period you will have to reapply for coverage . The second way to cancel a term life policy is to stop paying your premiums . The policy will lapse after your 31 day grace period . While this method is maybe the easiest , you will receive a lot of correspondence from the carrier , warning the lapse of your policy . It is always best just to write , mail , scan or fax your request and be done .
Stop loss is normally a term used in self funded employer group health plans but I have heard the phrase used to describe traditional major medical plans as well . Your stop loss is the point where -LRB- at least in theory -RRB- your liability for paying out of pocket ceases and the carrier pays 100 % of future covered claims . This only works in a practical matter in the case of a high deductible health plan -LRB- HDHP -RRB- where eligible claims are covered at 100 % once the deductible is satisfied . If you have a copay plan you can satisfy your major medical deductible and then hit your out of pocket coinsurance limit -LRB- stop loss -RRB- but still be responsible for paying claims for doctor visits , Rx and other items .
Retirement can thought of as a time of change . It is more than your job and paycheck stopping or the selling of your company . Retirement It is a event or at the very least transition . What happens if you do not plan and simply fly by the seat of your pants ? You probably will have income problems or end up paying more tax because of the lack of planning . There is of course the non monetary side . What are you going to do with the rest of you life after `` retirement ? . No plan then you may not like how things turn out . If you have more questions you can contact me . Start with my web site www.jpw.ca if you prefer .
Paid up value in life insurance is a non-forfeiture provision which is found in most classic whole life insurance policies . Non-forfeitureprovisions are a series of values found within a life policy that give you options if you want to stop making premium payments on your policy . These options are : Cash Surrender : Giving up or selling your policy back to the insurance company for the amount of cash value accumulated within your policy over the years you own it . These values are stated on a chart called Non-forfeiture Provisions contained within your policy . Extended Term Insurance : This provides for the continuation of the full face amount of your policy for a specified period of time based on the amount of cash value accumulated within your policy . The length of time is stated in the same chart listed as non-forfeiture provisions . Paid-up Insurance Value : This provision also is included the the chart of Non-forfeiture provisions and it lists the new face amount of insurance you can elect if you stop making premium payments for the policy . It is based on the cash surrender value of the policy at the time you stop making premium payments . Depending on the length of time the policy is in force this amount may equal the full face amount of the policy , and this amount will be in force for the rest of your life . There are policies that can be purchased with a date where the policy is fully paid up , such as a 20 year payment life , or a life paid up at age 65 . Generally these policies spread a lifetime of premium payments over a shorter period of time making the premium payments slightly more than a traditional whole life policy where premium payments are paid for the life of the insured , and are typically known as a limited payment life policy .
In a way , with some companies . What generally happens is that after a stated period of time , 10 years , 20 or 30 , the premium will start to increase dramatically . You will probably be forced to stop paying it . The way to avoid this is to convert your policy if permitted , to whole life . Otherwise try to obtain a whole life policy before your term ends . Five years or so after start is usually the sweet spot . Keep yourself covered , if there is any way possible . Thank you . GARY LANE .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is Elephant Car Insurance Like ?
Elephant car insurance is a very reputable company that is slowly making their presence felt here in the US . Actually , I just wrote an article about Elephant for one of my websites . They are not yet in every state , but they are very consumer-oriented and their employees love working for the company . And of course , where available , their rates are also very competitive .
Elephant car insurance is a very reputable company that is slowly making their presence felt here in the US . Actually , I just wrote an article about Elephant for one of my websites . They are not yet in every state , but they are very consumer-oriented and their employees love working for the company . And of course , where available , their rates are also very competitive .
Medigap -LRB- AKA Medicare supplement -RRB- and Medicare Advantage are like apples and elephants . Medigap is a supplement to fill in the holes -LRB- gaps -RRB- in Medicare by paying your deductibles and coinsurance . Medicare Advantage puts you in a private Medicare system managed by insurance carriers and introduces networks , copay 's , a lot of moving parts and a lot of out of pocket .
Long Term Care is the elephant in the room . Many carriers have exited the market because they were not able to make money in this niche . The question you should be asking is what will happen if my spouse or I require care ? You will not find any good answer unless you have coverage or can afford the $ 70,000 per year plus that it costs . The changes of needing care are high , but not for a long period of time . In addition , there are several other ways of paying for long term care with life insurance and annuity riders that you should investigate .
Elephant insurance is a very big company -LRB- no pun intended -RRB- . They are part of the Admiral Group and are slowly expanding here in the US . It is definitely a reputable company that features very competitive prices in many areas . Although they are not yet in most parts of the US , they are rapidly expanding .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
That is a great question ! I am sorry for your loss , it is tough when you do n't get to own the car long enough to even get a chance to enjoy it . Your insurer most likely uses what is called the `` Blue Book '' value to determine what your car is worth . The price that you paid three months ago most likely is higher than what the Blue Book will allow , since the car starts depreciating in value almost the minute that you drive it off the lot . They will factor in wear and tear , -LRB- dings , dents and normal wear of parts -RRB- and depreciation when they offer your settlement sum . Do not expect to get reimbursed for your tags and fees ; Those things are like gas to insurance companies , you need it to drive , but it 's not a part of the actual value of the car . If they do not give you what you want , you can always appeal the settlement , sometimes the company will give in and pay . I 'd hope so , in your case . Good luck , and thanks for asking !
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
In general , no , not for physical damage to the car . To insure property you need to have an insurable interest in the property you 're protecting . In other words , you have to have something at risk . If you do n't own it , what do you have at risk ? This why titling is so important . You could , theoretically , put insurance on a car you do n't own and not tell the insurance company that it 's not titled to you . Hopefully , your insurance agent is experienced and professional enough to ask who the car is titled to , but it does n't always happen . So , say you 've insured this car you do n't own and you get into an accident . You submit your claim to your insurance company to get your car repaired . One of the first questions a claims adjuster will ask is `` who is the car titled to ? '' . If the answer is n't you , you 've got a problem . The insurance company will only pay the registered owner of the car . They are the only party that has a loss . The only exception to this is if the car is financed or leased . In this case , the finance company will require , as part of the contract , to be listed as a loss payee . This entitles them to collect on the damage to that car . That 's how it applies to physical damage . For liability or injury , it 's different . Here , the insurance follows the insured . You could , theoretically , get liability insurance without owning the car you 're driving . Again , your agent will ask who owns the car , and they 'll believe what you tell them . If a claim happens for injury or liability , they will protect you , the insured . I do n't know why you 'd want to insure a car you do n't own , but I have an idea . It could be that a friend or relative is loaning you a car because you do n't have one of your own or it could be that a child , or someone else in your household owns this car but does n't want to , or ca n't , insure it themselves because they 're young and it 's expensive , or they have such a bad driving record they just plain ca n't get insurance . Either way , do n't get yourself in a situation where you have to lie to your insurance company or agent . If something happens , the truth will come out and you may not get anything out of it anyway . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust and be truthful with him/her . They 'll tell you the right way to do it so that you do n't put yourself or your family at risk .
If you 're auto insurance is just too expensive for you to afford , there are some things you can do to help ease that burden . You may not like some of my advice , but it 's the right advice . A very large part of your insurance premium is the physical damage to the car itself . Raising deductibles will lower your premiums somewhat . Ask yourself if you really need to cover the physical damage at all . If it 's an older car and you own it outright , this could be an option . Before you do this , however , understand that , if your car is damaged , the insurance company will not pay to fix it . One thing not to do is to lower your bodily injury liability limits . You wo n't save very much and you 'll be putting everything you own at risk , including your income . Here 's the advice you may not like : Perhaps you have too nice a car for your budget . If that 's the case , get a less expensive car . Then , when your finances -LRB- or your driving record -RRB- allow , you can always get a nicer car . Talk to an agent you can trust . They can give you advice on these questions as well as others . It also helps if you check rates on a car before you buy it . Everyone loves getting a new car . You just do n't want an unpleasant surprise when your insurance bill comes .
How can I minimize the amount I pay for auto insurance ? There are two sides to the insurance premium question . The first side is the dollars going to the insurance company . The other side is the dollars coming from the insurance company when you have a claim . The most expensive insurance policy is one that does not adequately protect you when you have a claim . If you have low liability limits and do several hundred thousand s of dollars in damage you might find your assets and income making up the difference when you have a claim and that could be devastating . When you look at the premium for a recent model car you will discover that the pricing is fairly evenly split between liability coverage and physical damage coverage . In a very general way this means that in an accident you can expect your car to receive as much damage as the other car . Different cars have different repair costs . These costs are determined by taking the results of actual claims and tracking the costs . Some cars have technology that makes them expensive to repair . Others have design features that make them expensive to repair . The safety features on some cars reduce the cost of repair . A client was making a search for a car based upon the total cost of operation . It was very interesting as we compared different makes and models . We were using the same approximate year so the comparison was just on the manufacturer and the different models being considered . The prices varied more than I would have anticipated . It seemed that the more curb appeal the car had , the more likely it was to be a repair shop nightmare . As a car ages its potential repair costs start to come close to its actual cash value . While the price for the physical damage insurance also starts to reduce there might well be a time when you consider the potential loss of your car to be negligible and then you should remove physical damage coverage . I have been startled by people who maintain physical damage on cars approaching 20 years of service . There is a sentimental attachment that is extremely important . Liability premiums also vary somewhat with the horsepower and weight of the vehicle . Sporty , high powered cars can do a lot of damage and statistically are more frequently involved in accidents than low powered plain models . I am often asked about whether or not a specific model is being treated as a sports car . The customer wants to argue the merits of the car . The fact is that the car has been rated on its own claims history and the rate is determined , not by logic , but by experience . It helps to understand the rating system for liability insurance . The year make and model are the starting point as some vehicles are more frequently involved in accidents than others . The second is the driving record and claims history of the principle operator and other drivers in the household . The companies weigh these driving records quite closely . The third factor , in California , is the number of miles the vehicle is used . Obviously every mile has a component of risk exposure so a vehicle being used 40,000 miles a year has a greater exposure to claim than one only being operated 400 miles a year . The next factor is where you live . Rural areas have fewer accidents than urban and some urban areas are worse than others . These factors are considered in determining a rate . Dont forget that the most expensive insurance is the policy that doesnt meet your needs when you have a claim .
The first penalty is that you more than likely would not be able to register your car for use on public roads . Most States require car insurance in order to do that . If you had car insurance but let it lapse , or cancel it , the Insurance Company in many states like Connecticut , will notify the Department of Motor Vechicles -LRB- DMV -RRB- . They will contact you and require you to show proof of coverage . If you can not , they will suspend your registration andit will be illigal to drive your car -LRB- s -RRB- . If you do drive and are stopped by a police officer , along with the charge for which you have been stopped , you will also be found to be driving an unregistered and uninsured car which will add to the size of your fine . In many cases the car will be towed and impounded and you will have to find another means of transportation back home , for which you may have to pay . You may also be required to appear in court . Once that is behind you , in order to get your car back , you will have to show proof that you have bought insurance again . It will be more expensive now because of the violations and the fact that you have not had continuous coverage . You will also have to pay to have the car releassed from the impound facility . You will have lost considerable time from work for all of this meaning that on top of having to shell out more money , you will have lost pay . Bottom line ... do n't drive without insurance .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
This depends upon what you mean by `` Business Car Insurance . '' If you are asking about insuring an automobile with a business auto policy , those are typically more expensive than a personal auto policy . If you are asking about insuring a company car , then that should be handled by the business providing you the automobile . The company should look into endorsements covering other drivers , in case your family members living in the house use your company car . If you are asking how much it costs to insure a company car on your personal auto policy this is not really an option because you do not have a valid insurable interest in the car . What I mean by this is the company owns the car and is getting a benefit from letting you use it , so your only interest is not paying for a car , which is not an insurable interest on your part . I hope this helps !
In Montana you get what is called a Non - Owned policy this is for liability only and will not repair the car that you are driving so if you are driving a friends car and wrecking it cover damage done to others but nothing for your friends car . Now in Montana also the insurance follows the car 1st so if you borrowed your friends car and got into an accident then their insurance covers it first then you insurance 2nd in many cases their insurance will collect what they paid from your insurance carrier . I have many clients that have this coverage because they ca n't afford a car . As stated by the last person that usually it is because the courts require it if you have had problems with your driving record . This is not always the case many of my clients have great driving records but own no car .
That 's a great question ! The answer will depend upon what you are using the car for . If it is your family car , and the family insurance policy , sorry , but probably not . If you are using it for both family and work , then you want to get a tax attorney or tax professional 's opinion . You may be able to deduct a portion . If It 's a business car , with a business policy , then most likely yes , you can . Two things to remember : Always consult a tax expert when deciding what to claim as a deduction ; and if you are using the family car for business , and have it marked in some way to advertise or designate your business and get into an accident , you may get a nasty surprise when you file the claim . Many insurance companies will tell you that since the car was being used in a business capacity , it is not insured unless covered by a business policy and deny your claim . If you would like more information , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
In our business we get a request like this from time to time . It always raises a big red flag . It 's a claim nightmare waiting to happen . The question I always ask but is rarely answered truthfully is `` why would you want to insure something you do n't own ? '' . The truth is usually that someone will let them use a car as long as they agree to insure it . Or , someone will insure the car as if they own it and just not tell us they do n't own it . That 's hwy our CSRs will ask to whom the car is titled . You can not insure something you do n't own because you do n't have a loss if it 's damaged or stolen . That 's insurance 101 - insurable interest . If the car is damaged , the insurance company will only pay the person to whom the car is titled . If you lie on the application and say that the car is titled to you when it 's not , you may actually get paid . However , if the insurance company does just a little research you could find yourself in a world of trouble . Here 's the correct way to handle this situation . The insurance must be written in the name of the titled owner of the car . The person who is driving the car is listed as the primary driver . If the agreement is that the driver is the person who actually pays the insurance , that 's fine , the insurance company is n't concerned with that . But be aware that anything that happens with that car will impact the owner . A cleaner way to do this is to actually give or sell the car to the person who will be driving it and transfer the title . The insurance can then be written properly and there will be no liability issued to speak of . Be smart , find an agent you can trust . They 'll tell you legal way to handle this . Do it the right way and avoid a nightmare at claim time .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Will Home Insurance Cover My Laptop ?
Discuss the specific terms and conditions of your Homeowners policy with your Insurance Professional , but it is likely that your policy will provide some coverage , albeit limited , for your laptop . Naturally any loss settlement would be subject to your policy deductible and there may be certain `` inside limits '' for laptops , computers , tablets , etc. that cap the amount of coverage and causes of loss .
It depends on your home policy , and what happened to the laptop . Your home policy protects your property against certain risks . If your laptop was stolen you may have coverage , but if you dropped it or spilled a drink on it that would not be covered on your home policy . In most cases though , your deductible is going to exceed the value of the laptop regardless of what caused the loss . Furthermore , you should try and protect your loss history . If your decuctible is $ 1,000 and it costs $ 1,200 to replace the laptop , your compensation will only be $ 200 . This may not be worth filing the claim as you may lose discounts for a clean loss history and the increased cost of insurance may not be worth it .
The answer is an astounding maybe . Wow , that sounds pretty vague , doesnt it ? Well , it depends on what is stolen from the car . Items that are permanently installed in the car are covered for theft , such as your internal GPS system or sound system . CDs , tapes , cassettes , and etc. can be covered if you add such coverage to your auto policy . What if you have things like a laptop in your car , or textbooks , or things you just bought from the mall and couldnt bring home yet ? NOT COVERED . Unless there is a special coverage available from your insurance company in your state , this is NOT covered under an auto policy . These items are covered under your renters , homeowners , condo , or other property policy as stipulated under your coverages . This is why it is important to have more than just auto insurance , as a missing laptop is emotionally and financially frustrating to replace . Renters insurance can be around $ 120 a year and will cover these belongings after a deductible of $ 250 - $ 1,000 . Make sure you have these items properly listed on your property policy as some limits are there for theft of valuable items like jewelry , precious and valuable items , electronics for business , and other items . However , that is going beyond the scope of this question . In short - auto policies are not designed to cover theft of items from the car . The policy covers some incidental items relevant to the car , but the rest of your items are really covered from your home property policy . So go out and talk to your agent and invest in the right policy to properly cover your contents .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
A laptop is covered as personal property under a renters -LRB- tenants -RRB- policy . Most insurers have a limitation for damaged electronic data equipment . There may be further restrictions if the laptop is a part of your business or belongs to your employer . The coverage also extends to your laptop when it is away from your residence ; however , there are limitations on coverage .
The laptop would only be covered if the damage was due to a covered peril , such as fire , theft , vandalism or other named perils in your policy . If the laptop was damaged because you dropped it then it would not be covered . Check your policy or call your agent .
Great question ! Homeowners and renters policies will define the payout for your belongings in most cases as either `` replacement '' or `` actual cash '' value . There can be a big difference between the two , and as the insured , you 'd like `` replacement '' , and as the company , the `` actual cash '' . Here 's why : Let 's say you have a laptop that you bought a couple of years ago , and it 's seen better days , it does n't run quite as quickly as it did , and has a few dings and dents . When it comes time to replace it , replacing your computer with a new version of it is what you would get with `` replacement value '' . With `` actual cash value '' the company would take a look at the price for the new computer , and subtract off the depreciation cost for the length of time you had the old one . You might have to settle for a lesser laptop , or pay the difference in this case to receive the same laptop that the `` replacement '' version would have provided . This is a simplified explanation , but should give you a good understanding of the differences . If you would like more info , just hit the contact me button , I 'd be happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Great question ! Most folks know the importance of homeowners insurance , but few people realize all of the benefits and coverage available with a renter 's insurance policy . Coverage options differ between insurance companies , but here is a quick list of items that are typically covered : 1 . It covers replacing all of your belongings , including furniture , clothes , shoes , tools , laptops , and TVs after a covered loss . -LRB- Many people incorrectly assume that if they are renting , their personal belongings are covered under the property owner 's insurance policy ; in most cases the renter 's belongings are not covered under the owner 's policy . -RRB- 2 . It covers medical costs for guests who may be injured in your home . -LRB- Perhaps the neighbor sprained their ankle falling off of your step ? Wouldnt it be nice to cover their medical expenses as a courtesy , and not have to pay out of your own pocket ? -RRB- 3 . It gives you liability protection for events you may be held liable for on or off the property . -LRB- Maybe the neighbor who sprained their ankle decides to sue you ? -RRB- 4 . It covers additional living expenses , such as a hotel room , and dining out in the event you are temporarily evacuated from your home . -LRB- Perhaps a pipe bursts , and the landlord says you have to stay somewhere else for 10 days while they conduct repairs ? -RRB-
depending on the policy form used , the electronics maybe covered in a home owners policy . In the HO-3 policy form the electronics are covered under the person property coverage section . It can be on an actual cash value basis or replacement cost . There is a separate coverage for electronics away from the premise , like computers , laptops , tablets and cellphones .
Renter 's insurance can cover laptops , depending on your specific benefits and what riders -LRB- if needed -RRB- that you have . Wear and tear will not be covered . Also mechanical failure will not be covered either . Each carrier will have different rates and coverage so consult with an experienced full-time broker for the best rates .
Like Edward has already answered , car break-ins are covered if you have the vehicle insured with Comprehensive -LRB- also called `` Other Than Collision '' coverage . Keep in mind thought , if anything is stolen - typically only those things permanently attached to the vehicle are covered under the auto policy . If a purse , laptop or other personal property not attached to the vehicle is stolen - most carriers cover these things under a homeowners or rental policy and are subject to that policies deductible and limits . So if your care gets broken into , you could be facing two claims and two deductibles unfortunately . Check with your local independent agent to verify your policy 's specific language .
If the laptop is broken as the result of a covered peril the renters policy will pay to make it whole . The payment will be subject to the deductible and if the computer has depreciated very much your reimbursement might not be significant . If the computer is damaged by negligence or if it simply is running out of gas , then it probably wont be covered at all .
I would suggest contacting your local agent to go over your exact policy coverages . Typically a renters insurance policy will cover : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment . Thanks for asking !
This question is very vague . Much would depend on the cause of the loss . If it is a covered cause of loss under the policy coverage , there would , likely , be limited coverage and it would be subject to the policy deductible unless the laptop is scheduled on an inland marine policy or has an inland marine endorsement added to the Homeowners policy . I hope your agent offers annual reviews of your policy . You should add this topic to the agenda .
Great question ! The answer depends upon a couple of things - your policies coverage , and where the laptop was when it was stolen . If it was taken from your apartment , then it generally will be . If it was in your car , parked in the apartment parking lot , there 's a good chance that you can get it replaced . If it was stolen at school , or you left it on a bus somewhere , that might be a whole lot harder to get back . I 'd advise you to contact your agent and tell them the story , and see what exactly your policy covers . Good luck ! Thanks for asking !
I have to assume your laptop was probably stolen if you are wishing to file a claim with your homeowners insurance carrier . If this is the case your insurance company would have a claims phone number you can call to open a claim . A report will be taken and then coverage will be determined . Keep in mind your homeowners insurance policy will have a deductible that will need to be met before the insurance company will pay out .
I would recommend contacting USAA directly to find out about your current policy coverages . Usually there are 3 main parts to your renters insurance coverage : 1 . Personal property coverage . Think of everything you own . Now , try to assign a dollar amount to all of those belongings . Pretty mind-boggling , is n't it ? A renters insurance policy offers you coverage for the theft , loss or destruction of your personal belongings in the event of a fire , storm or other covered peril . This can help you replace the items you use on a day-to-day basis , from your clothing to your appliances to your furnitureas well as your more expensive items . If you 're a die-hard jewelry collector or an audiophile with tens of thousands of dollars ' worth of pricey sound equipment , you can even take out extended coverage that provides you with higher limits , sometimes called floater insurance or Scheduled Personal Property coverage . This extra coverage may increase your deductibles , but will certainly be worth having to make sure you have enough coverage for your pricey items . Having a renters insurance policy can even cover your personal belongings when they 're not inside your homelike if you take your laptop with you on a trip and it is damaged or stolen . 2 . Liability coverage . Life is risk , but that does n't mean you have to dig deep into your pockets or drain your savings account every time something goes wrong . The liability insurance that comes as a part of your standard renters insurance policy can help protect you if you are sued by a guest injured in your home . Say someone comes over to your house and trips down your stairs , injuring themselves seriously enough to warrant medical attention . If you are found responsible for the accident , your renters insurance liability coverage can help pay for your legal expenses and their medical bills and other damages . When buying renters insurance , it pays to think long and hard about having enough coverage to guard against any eventuality . Liability coverage can even pay for damages caused accidentally by you or your family members . For example , if your child accidentally throws a baseball through your neighbor 's living room window , your liability insurance plan could cover the damages . 3 . Additional living expenses . People rarely think about where they 'd go or how they 'd pay for it if a fire or disaster were to render their rental home unlivable . With a renters insurance policy , you can rest easily because this coverage will help pay for your temporary living expenses . This can include things like hotel bills to restaurants to other living expenses you normally would n't incur . With a renters insurance policy , you do n't have to worry that a damaged roof will force you to share a house with your in-laws . For that alone , it 's a priceless investment .
Great question ! Anytime you take your personal belongings , and put them in someone else 's place of residence , it 's good to have protection for those belongings . In a dorm , maybe not , if the residency rules cover for theft or damage while living in the dorm . In a fraternity or sorority house , check the residency rules to determine if it is needed . In an apartment in a college town ? You bet . It 's relatively inexpensive , compared to the cost of replacing a good laptop , cell phone , or videogame system . -LRB- And especially tothe cost ofallthe above . -RRB- If you would like help , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
Without question , quote engines . They provide instant online quotes to consumers and of course , to brokers themselves . There is much more information in the quote engine software including online applications , product information , licensing information , and additional email capability . Certainly , a phone and laptop must be included along with some pretzels . I just ca n't work without pretzels .
It may provide some limited coverage for a laptop and may be subject to the policy deductible . Many homeowners policies have a stated cap on personal electronic items . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
What Is Car Insurance Full Coverage ?
When full coverage is discussed in respect to automobile insuance coverage it typically includes : liability , property damage , medical expense , comprehensive -LRB- other than collision -RRB- , collision , towing , and rental car reimbusement . Comprehensive -LRB- other than collision -RRB- and collision coverage typically have a deductible -LRB- this is the portion that the insured is responsible forbefore the insurnace carrier pays their part ofany claim .
A hybrid life insurance policy blends both non-medical and fully underwritten coverage . The idea is you get a portion of the death benefit being applied for as full coverage without an exam -LRB- the rest being AD&D coverage -RRB- and the rest turns into full coverage after an exam is completed and you 're approved . The initial process can be completed in just a few days -LRB- typically 48 hours or so -RRB- - when the exam is completed , it can take a few weeks for the underwriting to be wrapped up . Once the initial non-medical coverage is in force , you can then decide to take an exam to turn the rest of the coverage into full coverage -LRB- you generally have a window of about 6 months to complete the exam - can vary by carrier -RRB- . Even if you come up with poor numbers and are declined for the rest of the coverage being turned into full coverage , you can still keep the initial format of the plan because it 's already in force . It 's probably easier to envision with an example . If you apply for $ 250,000 of coverage with a 20-year term period under a hybrid life policy and you 're approved for the non-medical side -LRB- again , typically takes only a couple of days -RRB- , only a portion of the coverage will be full coverage . So let 's say the coverage is actually $ 100,000 of full coverage and $ 150,000 is AD&D -LRB- actual ratios will vary by carrier -RRB- . This means that if you died without completing the exam and getting the rest of the coverage approved , only $ 100,000 would be paid out instead of the full $ 250,000 . The only way the full $ 250,000 would be paid is if you died under accidental means -LRB- e.g. a car accident -RRB- . It sounds like a great idea on paper , right ? You 're getting coverage quickly and you 've got something locked in in case you ca n't qualify for the full coverage transition . There 's a huge issue with this type of program !!!! The RATE PER $ 1,000 of full coverage that you 're paying under a hybrid life policy can -LRB- and likely will be -RRB- A LOT higher than you would be paying for coverage under a traditional life policy - meaning you can end up spending a ton of extra money on premiums unnecessarily that could easily be in your own pocket . The chances of a claim for AD&D coverage is slim to none . You 're most likely to die from illness than you are to die from injury . *** You want to be paying the lowest cost per $ 1,000 of full coverage - this is the key point you want to look at when you 're buying your coverage . *** Think about it this way . If you 've got a $ 250,000 non-medical policy and a $ 250,000 hybrid policy , and the premium for the hybrid policy is less , you 're actually paying a much higher rate because only a portion of the face amount is full coverage , where as the entire face amount under the regular non-med policy is 100 % full coverage . But you can just take the exam and turn it into full coverage right ? Problem solved ? - NO !!! If you 're willing to take an exam in the first place , you may as well have just done a traditional fully underwritten program to start with , because the premiums for those programs are substantially less than they are for hybrid policies and you have full coverage from day 1 . The long and short of it is this - if you do n't want to take an exam , buy a non-medical policy . If you 're willing to take an exam to lower your premiums or secure a higher amount of coverage , apply for a fully underwritten program because you 're going to get much better rates . The idea with hybrid policies is to try to get the best of both worlds , but the process just does n't make much sense with how much you 're spending for full coverage . I hope this provides some clarification for you . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
Very rarely will a reputable car dealership even let you leave the lot with out proof of insurance that is full coverage . Even if you traded in your old car with a new car and the old one had full coverage on it you have limited coverage for the new car with some carriers it will only cover the amount of what the value was for the old car you traded in . I would recommend always prior to even shopping for a car you shop for the insurance rates on the new car and make sure you are properly protected .
For the most part , when someone refers to `` full coverage '' car insurance , they are referring to a policy that provides two key elements of coverage . Physical Damage protection for your car in the form of both Comprehensive and Collision is one of these , and Liability is the other . Some companies provide `` Single Limit '' Liability coverage meaning that both bodily injury and property damage coverage are combined in the same total pool . Others provide `` split limit '' meaning that you have a certain stated amount of coverage for Bodily Injury protection and a separate stated amount for Property Damage . In many states , a third element is required along with Liability in order to register your car and that is commonly referred to as `` Uninsured Motorist/Underinsured Motorist '' coverage . This provides benefits to you and your family members if you are injured as a result of an accident caused by someone operating a car with no or limited liability insurance . These areas consitute the main portions of a `` full coverage '' policy , but there may also be additional elements . Primary Medical payment , roadside assistance , rental car reimbursement , full glass , etc may also be included for example .
As I illustrated recently to a class of high school freshmen , that is really a complicated question but let me clarify full-coverage first . Insurance agents only use that term when someone else introduces the subject . We know that full-coverage does not mean that the insurance company will make everything right all the time . Policies have limits , claims are adjusted and there are a great many places where there could be misunderstandings . An insurance policy has two major sections , liability and property damage . Many people think that if they have coverage in both sections they have full-coverage . If they cause an accident and people are injured , they might well be sued . The liability portion of the policy will stand between them and the injured party until the judgments and expenses exceed the liability limits written in their policy . These limits can range from $ 15,000 to over $ 1 million . So if someone is injured and sues and wins a judgment in the amount of $ 50,000 , your full-coverage policy might not meet your needs and the court might be looking at your other assets to satisfy the judgment . A similar disagreement can arise with property damage . This is settled on actual cash value , unless you have a rare policy with agreed value coverage . There are two problems which present themselves . You might really love your little Ford Focus that you bought two years ago and when it is damaged disagree with the adjuster on the value of the car . When the car is inspected the adjuster may decide that the car can not be repaired economically . The adjusted value presented will probably be less than you expected because there is a deductible which will be taken out of the settlement . Again , your full-coverage policy may not cover you in the way that you want . However , you asked about cost and in California the cost is dependent on the year , make and model of the vehicle , where the vehicle is registered , the driving record of the members of the household , the annual mileage of the vehicle , and then the coverages that you select . Companies offer discounts and sometimes assess penalties based on driving histories , other types of coverage , the occupation of the principal operator and other factors . The answer to how much it costs is , it depends .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
That 's a great question ! Most commonly , you will be required to carry full coverage insurance on the car idf the car has been purchased through a lender . So that they are not out their investment in your car , they will often require the full coverage on the car . You may also need it for company vehicles , but lenders most commonly . Thank you for asking !
All insurance auto policies are the same they all have liability which is damage to other . Then you have optional coverage of un insured and under insured and medical pay then of course the option of `` Full '' coverage which really is not the best choice of words for coverage but that is coverage that repairs your auto in the even of a loss minus the deductible . The best coverage would be to have higher limits and full coverage . How ever you budget needs to thought about also . If you are purchasing all the coverage and ca n't afford the higher deductible then full coverage may not be the best option for you . Before you ever purchase a car or insurance shop around call a local agent and discuss what options you have . Many agencies demand that you have certain limits which is recommended to have the higher limits but it is pointless if you ca n't afford the higher limits because if it means eating or insurance well you going to choose food . Talk to an agent who will listen to your concerns and find you the most affordable rate and coverage that your desire . Online quotes can sometime be lower but the service sometimes is not as well as an agent example at our agency you can reach us 24/7 we never want you to ever have to call a 800 number and talk to a stranger .
Life insurance can cover death in one of two ways : 1 -RRB- Full coverage 2 -RRB- AD&D Full coverage means that the life insurance policy will pay out a death benefit regardless of whether death occurs by illness -LRB- including old age & natural causes -RRB- or injury . This is the most common type of life insurance that is purchased because a person is much more likely to die due to illness than they are by an injury -LRB- e.g. car accident or a plane crash -RRB- . AD&D is short for Accidental Death & Dismemberment . This kind of life insurance , while typically cheaper than full coverage , only pays out a death benefit if death occurs due to injury -LRB- the types of injuries that are covered may be outlined in the plan as opposed to general language -RRB- . Given that the average person is much more likely to die due to illness than they are from injuries , full coverage is a much more desired option for people . If a person dies by illness and has an AD&D policy , this coverage will not pay out a death benefit . It 's important to consult with an experienced life insurance broker to compare your options and help you determine the type , amount , and length of coverage that will be most suitable to your needs and budget and which carrier can offer that coverage at the lowest rates . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
Full coverage is always a dangerous term . Most people consider full coverage as having comprehensive a collision coverage 's on their vehicle . However this would leave out medical , rental reimbursement , towing and possible more options . With that said the coverage is not actually full . With this question being a blanket question it is actually impossible to answer without a series of questions being asked first such as location , age of operator , marital status , driving history and driving record not to mention type of car . I highly suggest you contact a local agent who can quote you multiple companies to find you the best coverage 's and rates to fit your needs .
This remains an area of great confusion to many small business owners . If you have less than 50 employees the answer is `` No '' . The employer mandate provision of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 100 or more full time employees beginning in 2015 and for employers with 50 to 99 full time employees in 2016 . Please note that when I use the term full time employees this means employees who work 30 + hours per week and also includes what are referred to as full time equivalent employees -LRB- FTEs -RRB- . FTEs are part time employees whose work hours are totaled up according to IRS approved calculations that are then translated into some number of full time employees to be added to the employer 's regular full time employee count to arrive at a total employment figure that may determine whether an employer is subject to the employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act or is eligible to participate in the SHOP -LRB- small business group insurance -RRB- offering -LRB- s -RRB- in the government health insurance marketplaces . Totally simple , right ? Any business owner would be well advised to seek out a knowledgeable health insurance broker/consultant to assist them is making these determinations and explaining the record keeling , tracking and reporting requirements the employer may be subject to under the Affordable Care Act . Getting this stuff wrong could have serious tax implications for the employer . If I can be of any assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me as I am a Chartered Benefit Consultant .
It simply means that you have both liability and collision / other collision deductibles , but full coverage is a nice term used by most car salespeople . You can have state minimum coverage and have what they call full coverage , but if you 're carrying state minimum coverage that will probably be an issue if you have more than a fender bender . The best thing to do is to contact a local independent agent and see what you need to protect . Based on studies , 75 % of all people are under insured on their auto and with 1 out of 6 people in the U.S. not having insurance , that is a deadly combination .
There are many factors and unanswered information that is needed . What type of sports car what year and your driving record and what state you are in . I can tell you that I have an insured that has his newerFerrari and is in his mid 40 's and is paying less then 200 a month full coverage of course but with 0 deductibles . But he also has and older Ferrari and it had full coverage and pays 200 a year for it with 0 deductible . So to be able to give you a more accurate answer you would need to provide more information
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
You 're going to want to read your policy . Often times , your auto insurance will extend the highest level of coverage on your policy to a vehicle you are driving with permission or renting . If you have full coverage -LRB- ie . comprehensive and collision coverage -RRB- , you would be extended full coverage . However , almost all insurance policies exclude coverage for loss of use of that other vehicle and will only pay market value for the loss of the vehicle . So , if you are in an accident with a rental car , the rental company has the right to charge you for each day it is out of service being repaired -LRB- YOU PAY THIS , NOT INSURANCE -RRB- . Also , if the auto company has a value on the books of $ 20,000 for the vehicle and your insurance company only pays $ 15,000 for the car in a total loss , you are responsible for the difference . EVERY insurance agent who knows anything , would tell you to take the third party insurance coverage . If you plan ahead however , Travel Guard by Chartis offers the same coverage the rental companies will , minus liability which would be through your insurance , to protect against the loss of use and the difference in value .
This one 's pretty simple if you have a good agent with a well trained staff . Simply call them up and tell them you 're replacing a car . To make sure they have everything they need have this information : Year , make and model of new car Full 17 digit VIN When you got your new car When you got rid of your old car Talk about the coverage you want : Comp & Collision ? Deductibles Anything special added to the car If it 's financed or leased , they 'll need to know the name , address , and loan or lease number of the finance or leasing company How you 'd like to receive your certificate of insurance Also at this time , it might be a good idea to ask what the premiums will be so you can budget for it . If you have n't sold your old car yet , do n't take the coverage off it . This is important . If you let someone test drive your car and they get in an accident or hurt someone , you want to be sure your covered . The premium you 'll pay for that short period of time is worth it .
Every life insurance policy covers accidental death . Traditional life insurance policies provide full coverage -LRB- paying out proceeds in the event death occurs by illness or injury -RRB- . Partial coverage policies only covering accidental deaths are known as Accidental Death & Dismemberment life insurance programs . These policies typically feature much lower premiums than full coverage programs , but only pay out a death benefit if death occurs under certain conditions -LRB- e.g. dying in a car accident -RRB- . If you only have an AD&D policy and you die due to a heart attack , the policy would not pay out any proceeds because that would be considered death due to illness . Even though the premiums are less with AD&D policies , it 's worth paying the premiums for a full coverage life insurance policy because individuals are most likely to die due to illness than they will by injury .
Graded death benefit whole life insurance is permanent coverage that features an alternative structure in the first 2 or 3 years of the policy -LRB- depending on the insurance company -RRB- . The program will feature one of two graded benefit methods . 1 -RRB- Return of premium - if death occurs during the graded period , any premiums paid into the policy is given to the beneficiary . If death occurs under accidental means , then the full benefit is still payable . After the graded period has expired , the full benefit is payable regardless of whether death occurs due to illness or injury . Some carriers may offer interest on your premiums if the insured passes away during the graded period - be sure to review your policy to see if it 's under your policy . The return of premium structure is more commonly seen under graded benefit whole life policies . 2 -RRB- Reduced death benefit - if death occurs during the graded period , the coverage will payout a specific percentage of the death benefit , depending on which year during the graded period death occurs . For example , if death occurs during the first year of the policy , the carrier only pays 30 % or 35 % of the death benefit -LRB- depending on the carrier -RRB- - 70 % or 75 % if death occurs during year 2 . If death occurs under accidental means during the graded period , then the full benefit is payable . After the graded period has expired , the full benefit is payable regardless of whether death occurs by illness or injury . Under final expense policies -LRB- another name for small whole life policies with face amounts of $ 25,000 or less -RRB- , the responses to the health questions determine whether you will qualify for a level benefit -LRB- immediate full coverage -RRB- or a graded benefit . Typically , to qualify for a level benefit , all the health questions have to be answered no . Please note , just because you may not be able to answer all health questions no for one carrier 's program , does n't mean you would n't be able to answer no to all questions for a different carrier . Each insurance company has their own questions that they ask so one carrier may be able to consider a level benefit where another may not . The wording to the questions is critical to pay attention to . If you ca n't qualify for traditional final expense coverage , you always have the option for GUARANTEED ISSUE whole life . These programs do not ask any health questions whatsoever . They will feature the return of premium graded period . When buying any whole life insurance policy , be sure to remember 2 things : 1 -RRB- Do the premiums remain the same for the entire life of the policy ? - Some policies feature banded premium - meaning they go up every 5 years . They may be cheaper up front during the first couple years , but can cost significantly more over the long run . 2 -RRB- What age does the coverage carry you to ? - Some policies will only carry you to age 80 or to age 90 - and if you live beyond that age , your policy automatically terminates . It 's best to set yourself up with something that guarantees the coverage will remain in place for life -LRB- as long as you continue to pay your premiums of course -RRB- . I always suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare multiple insurance policies with your medical history to make sure you 're getting the desired coverage at the lowest possible cost . There is no cost to doing so . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
You can go about securing coverage in one of two ways for this type of medical history . A route with no medical questions would be issued under a guaranteed-issue , graded benefit whole life insurance policy -LRB- 2-year waiting period for full coverage to start - accident only coverage in years 1 and 2 -RRB- . The maximum amount of coverage you can secure under one of these programs is between $ 20,000 - $ 25,000 . Please note , most guaranteed-issue life insurance policy have a minimum age requirement of 45 or 50 years old and a maximum age allowance of 80 or 85 years old . The 2nd route is going to be the most advantageous If you 're looking for more coverage than that , but you would need to go through full underwriting . These programs would allow you to secure full coverage from day 1 of the policy -LRB- no waiting period under a graded benefit -RRB- . The specific details regarding the stroke history -LRB- e.g. was there any paralysis and where , were there any lingering effects , are you still taking medications to treat lingering effects as a result of the stroke , etc. -RRB- as well as the diabetes history . For the diabetes history , the most recent A1C reading , when was it diagnosed , how is it being treated , etc. will affect the risk classification a carrier can/will offer -LRB- this determines the rates -LRB- cost -RRB- for the coverage , if approved -RRB- . You will need to shop the case among multiple companies to see which carriers can consider coverage at what risk class . Every company has their own underwriting guidelines so some companies may be able to work with the medical history where others may not - for this , I highly recommend shopping the case first before applying for ANY coverage because throwing mud against the wall to see what sticks -LRB- applying to multiple companies -RRB- can work against you as it can become a red flag to insurance companies when they see declines in the MIB -LRB- Medical Information Bureau -RRB- records . An independent insurance broker such as myself can do this for you . My group is licensed in over 35 states and with over 50 insurance companies and we charge no fees to our clients for our services . We can help you with the entire process from start to finish . If you 'd like assistance in buying a life insurance policy , please send me a message and we will help you shop the case so you can secure the desired coverage at the lowest possible cost - my contact information is provided on my profile . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much for your question .
end question
start question
home-insurance
What Information Do I Need For Home Insurance Quote ?
Well first congratulations on the possible purchase of a home . First we would need the physical address , then the details about the home . The location determines the fire department and distance from fire hydrants , if there are any . The details about the home , things like what type of construction it is , log or frame , and quality are important for us to calculate the cost to replace or repair the home if there was a claim . Also insurance companies need a bit of property history about you . . this is where having renters or some sort of property insurance history is good .
Any home business is unique . You may need Commercial General Liability , Product Liability , Workers Compensation , Commercial Auto , Director 's and Officer 's , Professional Liability , Inland and Ocean Marine . Ask yourself the following questions : - Do I meet with customers in my home office ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I go out and meet with other people for my business ? If yes , I need general liability . - Do I deal with any products , sales , stock , inventory , equipment ? If yes , I need general liability with products/completed operations included . - Do I offer installations or servicing ? - Do I use any subcontractors ? - Do I have other people come to my home office work for me , including janitorial and landscaping maintenance ? Once you answered these questions contact your HO insurance agent and ask if your HO policy contemplates any home office exposures ? You can compare insurance quotes for your home business online at WEBSITELINK
There are several ways to obtain a quote for homeowners insurance . You may certainly fill out a quote form online ; almost every big name carrier has one on their website/app . The problem with doing a quote yourself is that you are not a licensed insurance agent , you likely do not know what limits you should have . Most online quotes also do not run your credit or loss history , which may have big impacts on your premium . What is the best way to get an accurate quote ? Contact a licensed independent insurance agent and give them your information . Ask questions ! Tell them your story ! Tell them what kinds of things you own ! If you want your assets properly covered more information is better . Most agencies have a form on their website/app a prospect may complete . Otherwise email or call asking for a quote .
Life insurance quotes are an estimation of the premiums you would pay for a given life insurance coverage structure -LRB- face amount and term length -RRB- . However , a quote is only as good as the information it 's based on . So if you run a quote at the most preferred rates and have n't factored in your height/weight , medications used , medical conditions , family medical history , tobacco usage , driving history issues , participation in extreme/hazardous activities , and a number of other factors , then the quote figures you ran are pretty much useless as they do not represent an accurate picture for the proposed coverage . The risk classification is the MOST IMPORTANT part of any quote an insurance agent gives you because the risk classification determines the premiums for the coverage . The final risk class a carrier approves you at after underwriting your policy will tell you what premiums the carrier will require for the coverage to be active . Many individuals like to see quotes with the most preferred rates -LRB- preferred plus risk class -RRB- as they are the cheapest cost and then they end up thinking that 's what they should get -LRB- and if they do n't get it , then they will forget the entire process and not even bother securing any coverage at all -RRB- . What you apply for is not always what you get - not everyone qualifies for the best rates . For example , if you have a major medical condition -LRB- e.g. heart attack , diabetic , had cancer , etc. -RRB- and the quote that was ran was for a preferred plus risk class , you 're wasting your time applying for it because every carrier is going to offer a higher risk class -LRB- and therefore require higher premiums -RRB- for the coverage -LRB- or possibly decline or postpone you for coverage depending on the details of the medical history -RRB- . This is why it 's critical to work with an experienced , knowledgeable , independent life insurance broker who knows the right questions to ask and can shop the case among multiple companies so they can give you the most accurate quotes up front that represent a realistic expectation of what you can expect to pay for the desired life insurance program . An important note : You NEVER want to just apply to a bunch of companies to see what sticks as this actually works against you because it 's a red flag to insurance companies when they complete the MIB check during underwriting -LRB- Medical Information Bureau - every carrier checks this because if you were declined by other companies , they want to know why -RRB- . You want to have your best -LRB- and most accurate -RRB- estimate up front so you get it right the first time so you can get the best rates for your program . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Talk to your Insurance Professional about your specific needs . In addition to your name and address of course , they will need to know spousal information as well as that of any licensed drivers in your home . That will include everyone 's dates of birth , Drivers License Numbers and possible , though not always , Social Security numbers . Tickets or accidents ? Be up front . This information is not a secret and so you may as well be open from the get go . For the most accurate quotes , all this should be included . Next the year , make and models of the cars involved along with the Vehicle Identification Numbers -LRB- VIN -RRB- . Talk about the amount of coverage for which you are looking and be sure to include lien or lease information if applicable . The specifics of the lien or lease are n't impiortant for a quote but they will offer important information for your advisor to use as a guide for their recommendation . If you own an home or rent , take advantage of any bundling discounts and get a quote on that too .
California life insurance quotes can be found online through life insurance websites that have a quote engine that you can use -LRB- most do -RRB- . If you want to compare multiple companies at the same time , I would recommend using the quote engine from a life insurance broker website -LRB- brokers are insurance agents who can quote and sell products from multiple companies -RRB- . The quote engines will typically request a few pieces of data such as your name , date of birth , height/weight profile , any prescriptions you take or medical conditions you 're being treated for , the state you live in , and the amount and length of coverage to quote . Once you hit submit , an instant quote will be generated for you to review and an agent will likely follow-up with you shortly . Please note , an instant quote is , in short , just a rough estimate . The risk classification you qualify for is the MOST important factor in creating a quote because it 's what determines the premiums for the desired coverage -LRB- e.g. being approved for a standard risk class vs. a preferred plus risk class will result in very different numbers -RRB- . If you are being treated for any medical conditions or take a number of prescriptions , you will get a much more accurate response by consulting with an insurance broker.who can shop the case for you . Buying life insurance can be a very strenuous and time consuming task when you try to do it on your own . We do not charge any fees for our services , so you can only help yourself by talking with a broker . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Getting the best life insurance quotes can be like walking a tightrope . Some agents will quote low just to get your application . Then when you are approved , they simply send you the policy , assuming you will be tired of the process and just give in and accept it.Other agents quote high because they would rather give you good news that your rate turned out lower than higher than quoted . What really matters in the end , is that you get a policy with a life insurance company that is favorable to your type of health , age , and the type of policy you get -LRB- Term , Whole Life , or Universal Life -RRB- . So no matter what quote you get , you need to pay close attention to the credentials of your agent . Some things to look at are : 1 -RRB- Are they able to shop for you from more than one company ? 2 -RRB- Do they ask questions to determine what policies and ratings you qualify for ? 3 -RRB- Do they appear to understand your health condition -LRB- s -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Do they have a following as evidenced by testimonials , referrals , etc ? 5 -RRB- If they have a website , does it have security and privacy features ? 6 -RRB- Do they appear to be sincere and honest ? If you can get in touch with an agent who has those credentials , chances are that your quote will be as accurate as possible . More importantly , no matter what your quote is , you will have the best chance at being approved at the best rate with the best company for your particular health and age .
Insurance quotes are a very detailed process which will require first finding out which insurance companies write policies in your area . Contacting insurance agents local to your area is the best way tO search . I always feel quoting with more than one insurance carrier is best . An independent agent in your area can usually quote you for three or more carriers at one time . Also , if you search for independent agents online that write insurance in your state you can get multiple quotes . Once you select an agent , you will be asked for personal information , claims history , and information specific to the home . The more you know about your home the better off you will be . Additionally , remember to get replacement cost coverage , a water backup endorsement if you have a basement , schedule any valuable personal property especially jewelry , and ask about any other coverage endorsements they have available . Request the quote in writing , so that you have the ability to review the coverage and its associated cost .
Yes , using a search engine like Google or Bing there will be many websites to choose from to quote life insurance . Be careful to read the fine print at the bottom of the disclosure page . The majority of `` quote sites '' are information collection sites that will sell your information to multiple agents . These `` lead '' companies will sell and resell your information and you will be bombarded with phone calls and emails . Most quote sites are not accurate on the quote . Most sites will give their best preferred rate which only about 2-4 % of the population qualify for . it is more about selling your information . Try asking friends , family and co-workers for names of trusted independent brokers to shop for you free of charge to find the best product at the best price for your unique situation .
You will need the address of the property , Social Security number , basic information about the house such as ranch , two story , approximate age , has the wiring plumbing heating been updated if the house is older . Much of the information can be retrieved from the county auditors website by the agent . He will probably want to know if you have a dog and what type since some companies restrict certain breeds . If there is a pool , what type and is it fenced ? Some of this may not be absolutely essential for a generalized quote but if you want your independent insurance agent to be able to give you his best rate , the more information he has helps because he can shop the companies he represents . Your quoting agent can tell you the exact information he needs .
Different websites have different ways of giving quotes online . With ours , you can put in your information and get quotes instantly , then change the variables to get different types of quotes . We also give average quotes for some health conditions . With others , you put in your information , then someone calls you with the actual quote . Either way , it is a good idea to talk to an agent to give the extra health details , help you decide the amount , and finalize your best , most accurate quote .
You want to find the structure that is going to be the most suitable to meet the needs you want to have covered . There 's a number of factors that you should think about when buying life insurance including : 1 -RRB- Why do you need the coverage ? 2 -RRB- How long do you need it ? 3 -RRB- What risk class do you qualify for ? -LRB- this is one of the MOST critical items when buying insurance because it 's what determines the premiums for the coverage you 're applying for -RRB- . 4 -RRB- Does the policy provide full coverage -LRB- payout whether death occurs by illness or injury - if you die by illness and you only have an AD&D policy , then the policy will not pay a death benefit -RRB- . 5 -RRB- What is the company 's financial rating ? - this is a big point when you 're looking at permanent coverage . Work with an experienced independent life insurance agent/broker . Doing the research on your own can be extremely time consuming and you may not always find the information you 're looking for . Independent brokers have an extensive knowledge of the subject matter and know the differences between products that are available in the marketplace . Brokers can help you through the entire process from start to finish . This includes helping you determine how much coverage is suitable to what you need the coverage for and how long you should have it in place for through an insurance needs analysis , provide quotes from multiple carriers and compare the options with you , track the application while it 's in underwriting and provide assistance on future needs as well . If you 'd like assistance in buying a life insurance policy , send me a message - my contact information is provided on my profile . I do not charge fees for my input and can walk you through the entire process of securing a policy .
You will need the date of construction for the home , the address , the total square footage , type of basement , number of stories , type of siding , type of roofing , type and size of garage , home heating source , distance to nearest responding fire department , distance of nearest fire hydrant , your personal information , and possibly more detailed information on the home to be able to receive a proper quote . After the quote , complete underwriting , sign paperwork and make premium payment .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : - A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . - The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . - The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . - The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Under certain conditions , Medicare Part A will cover intermittent or part-time home health care provided by a skilled nurse . Again , Medicares requirements for receiving home care are quite strict . Medicare will pay for home health care to treat an illness or injury only if a person meetsallof the following requirements : A doctor must determine that medical care is needed at home and must make a plan for such care . The person needs intermittent skilled nursing care , physical therapy , speech therapy , or occupational therapy . The person is homebound , which means generally unable to leave home -LRB- when a person leaves , it must be infrequent and for a short time only , such as to go to a doctors appointment -RRB- . The home health care agency must be Medicare-approved . Keep in mind that unlike Medicares nursing home benefit , a person does not need to be admitted to a hospital first in order to qualify for Medicare home health care . In addition , services will be provided on an intermittent or part-time basis only by a visiting nurse , therapist , or home health aide . Medicares home health care benefit does not pay for 24-hour full-time care . Medicare generally limits its home health care benefit because the program is only designed to serve individuals who need intermittent care for a relatively short period of time rather than care on a daily basis . Once a person is receiving Medicare home health care , his or her plan of care will be reviewed at least every 60 days . If the persons health changes and care is no longer needed , the home health agency will notify the individuals doctor , who must then contact Medicare . From that point , home care will no longer be covered by Medicare . The Medicare home health care benefit will not pay for homemaker services such as housekeeping , shopping , and cleaning . It also does not pay for custodial carethat is , help with meeting daily personal needs such as bathing , toileting , transferring , or eating . Because most people who need long-term care need custodial care , financial practitioners should point out this shortcoming to clients . Many people who do qualify for Medicare home health care benefits still need to pay for additional custodial care in order to live comfortably and independently at home .
Health insurance for small businesses works very differently from individual coverage - there are many moving parts involved with putting together a group health insurance plan . There are different types of programs available for group coverage and each business may have a different tolerance for what they 're willing to take on in terms of price or what they 're willing to offer to their employees . Group health insurance quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- except in Maryland , which requires no medical underwriting -RRB- . There 's really no way to say what group coverage costs without going through that input first to create the quotes . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance for these reasons . To get a quote for group coverage , you will need to consult with an experienced health insurance broker . We can shop for quotes from multiple companies for you and create a benefit structure that best serves the needs and budgets of your business and your employees . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help -LRB- we can help you get your company 's group health insurance set up -RRB- and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The minimum information needed for a quote is the year make and model of the car , the names and birthdates of the drivers in the household , the address of the household and an indication of incidents . I also need the limits of coverage desired . In order to actually convert that quote to an application , I also need the occupations of the drivers , the VIN of the vehicles , the drivers license numbers . It may sound like a great deal of information but most drivers have that information handy .
It is simple to change homeowners insurance carriers!You mayobtain a quote and purchase your new #HomeInsurance policy online . You will only need to answer a few simple details regarding your home -LRB- i.e. year built , square footage , type of roof etc. . . -RRB- , a few personal details and you will need toprovide your mortgage information to be listed on the policy -LRB- if applicable -RRB- . Once you have your quote , you may bind the new policy by providing yourdesired method of payment ; thus turning the quote into a policy . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The trick to this is getting quotes that are comparable.There are so many more nuances in Homeowners coverages than on auto . So start out with what coverages you have now . Start with the amount of insurance on Coverage A of your policy . Does this really reflect the replacement cost of your property ? Now look at the ancillary coverages : Do you have water/sewer back up ? Does the limit include both dwelling and contents or only one or the other . Do you have Law and Ordinance Coverage what is the percentage ? What about personal injury coverage ? Do you have a schedule or need specific coverage on jewelry , watches or furs or similar expensive items limited in the existing policy by a dollar value ? If so what is it ? Do you need special circumstantial coverage for a home based business , ? Do you have home Warranty Coverage ? Do you have Earthquake coverage ? Is it constrained by a per cent deductible ? If so what is it ? I think you will get the picture . then I would suggest you give an independent agency a call or visit their website . We would be glad to help you , but perhaps you are not in the Atlanta area and want some local contact . We understand that but our recommendation to an independent agent is still sound advice as they typically will have multiple companies to compare .
To issue a homeowners policy , the company will need a great deal of information . They will need information about the fire protection where the home is located . They will need to know the size and construction of the home . They want to know how close the home is to a body of water . They will need to know what pets are on the property . They will need to know the condition of the home , in particular , the roof . Most insurers require photographs of the home .
end question
start question
annuities
What Are The Different Kinds Of Annuities ?
The different kinds of annuities have not just one , but a variety of features that make them different . Here are some of them . Keep in mind that each annuity will have a combination of these differing features . 1 -RRB- Immediate vs Deferred . Immediate annuities are often single premium annuities and they begin making payments to the beneficiary almost immediately . Deferred annuities are often paid periodically , although they can also be paid in a single premium . Deferred annuities are not annuitized until after an extended accumulation period . 2 -RRB- Single Premium or Multiple Premium . 3 -RRB- Fixed , Indexed , or Variable . Fixed annuities have a guaranteed minimum interest rate that is paid on the premium paid for the annuity . Indexed annuities have a base interest rate but can perform above that through the use of market indexes . Variable annuities are invested in the stock or other markets and may or may not have guarantees .
There are many different kinds of annuities offered by many different insurance companies . Each annuity has its own features . I typically group annuities into four main categories . Immediate Annuities : This is an annuity that begins a payment stream upon purchase or shortly thereafter -LRB- within a year -RRB- . The payment is guaranteed for a period of time or for a lifetime -LRB- or lifetimes in the case of a joint payout -RRB- . Variable Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of the sub-accounts within the contract . The owner of the annuity can choose which accounts to allocate their funds . The performance of the annuity can be either positive or negative so an owner is assuming some level of investment risk . Fixed Annuity : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is set for a fixed period of time . The interest rate of the annuity is usually set at the purchase date but can be adjusted at a later date in some contracts . The performance is usually a known outcome and highly dependent on the length of the annuity contract . Indexed Annuities : This annuity has tax deferred growth that is based on the performance of an particular index -LRB- es -RRB- . The owner can choose which index -LRB- es -RRB- to allocate their funds such as the S&P , but their funds are n't actually invested in that index . The index is only used to determine the performance . The performance of indexed annuities are usually only zero or higher with a limit on the upside known as a `` cap . '' These are general definitions and are by no means suggesting which is better or more appropriate for any situation . My recommendation , if you are interested in learning more about annuities , is to speak with a professional licensed to describe the pros and cons of each annuity type based on your particular situation .
The different kinds of annuities have not just one , but a variety of features that make them different . Here are some of them . Keep in mind that each annuity will have a combination of these differing features . 1 -RRB- Immediate vs Deferred . Immediate annuities are often single premium annuities and they begin making payments to the beneficiary almost immediately . Deferred annuities are often paid periodically , although they can also be paid in a single premium . Deferred annuities are not annuitized until after an extended accumulation period . 2 -RRB- Single Premium or Multiple Premium . 3 -RRB- Fixed , Indexed , or Variable . Fixed annuities have a guaranteed minimum interest rate that is paid on the premium paid for the annuity . Indexed annuities have a base interest rate but can perform above that through the use of market indexes . Variable annuities are invested in the stock or other markets and may or may not have guarantees .
That is a GREAT question ! The `` twin '' question to `` how much is right '' , is : `` Which KIND is right '' . There are more than 10 types of Life Insurance : at least 3 kinds of `` Term '' insurance , and at least 10 kinds of `` Permanent '' insurance . Which kind is right for you depends on your goals and needs . That would include your family situation , your financial situation , and what and who you want to benefit . Then when all that is determined the amount of benefit can be determined . A kind of `` rule of thumb '' - taken completely out of context with all the other variables is about 8 to 10 years worth of your annual income . But in reality each situation is unique to the individual client . That 's why personally I take an Education and Fact Finding approach to advising my clients on which kind and how much insurance to implement .
Generally , when you buy an annuity you 're going to keep it for the life of the contract . Annuities can be cancelled early , but you will likely have surrender charges and certain tax implications involved if you do . What kind of annuity you have may have different penalties for surrendering the annuity early . If you surrender the annuity before 591/2 , I believe you can face a 10 % federal tax penalty on the value of the annuity . You should definitely talk it over with your annuity agent before making any decisions so you know what may happen if you surrender the annuity early . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Generally , when you buy an annuity you 're going to keep it for the life of the contract . Annuities can be cancelled early , but you will likely have surrender charges and certain tax implications involved if you do . What kind of annuity you have may have different penalties for surrendering the annuity early . If you surrender the annuity before 591/2 , I believe you may/can face a 10 % federal tax penalty on the value of the annuity . You should definitely talk it over with your annuity agent before making any decisions so you know what may happen if you surrender the annuity early . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help or if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
What are annuities ? Well as simply as possible , Annuities are investment products offered through insurance companies . There are different kinds of annuities , some for building balances and others for spending balances of money . The building balances form of annuity is invested and grows tax deferred over time . This is known as the accumulation phase . Depending on your choice of accumulation annuity you can have little risk to significant risk on return . Reducing your investment risk usually also means reducing your investment return . Accumulation annuities can offer a larger range of risk and return options along with tax deferral . When you decide to spend or distribute savings through an annuity , it is called an immediate annuity and begins a systematic series of regular payouts over your lifetime . An immediate annuity is know as a product that you `` ca n't outlive '' as it will pay you as long as you live . And , depending on the payout you choose , can guarantee that if you pass early , the payouts will continue to a beneficiary of your choosing for a set number of years or until all of your contributed funds are spent . An immediate annuity now offers a variety of payout options and really should be considered as part of a retirement portfolio . They provide a constant steady stream of income that will last as long as you do and if you choose an option will keep pace with inflation over time .
Many insurance companies offer annuities such as Guardian , MetLife Prudential , ING , Nationwide , Genworth , and Lincoln National , just to name a few . If you 're looking to purchase an annuity , I would advise consulting with an independent annuity broker who can review options from multiple companies to find you the annuity that will maximize your return . The type of annuity is a major factor as there are a number of different kinds such as fixed annuities , equity linked index annuities , etc. . Please feel free to contact me for assistance with your program and if you have any other questions . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
That is like asking what kinds of fish will I catch today if I just throw my line into the water . Interest rates on annuities are very different not only from company to company but product to product . Few people purchase an annuity for their interest rates unless the rate is guaranteed for 5-10 year periods . People mainly buy annuities for the no risk guarantees of having lifetime income . If you are comparing interest rates for the long term , annuities will compete . If interest rates are compared for the short term , annuities are not appropriate vehicles because of the surrender charges .
The advantages of having life insurance is knowing that your financial obligations will be taken care of and not a burden on your survivor . The disadvantage of life insurance is that for the vast majority the insureds do not match their Survivor 's need for cash upon their death with the ` Right Kind ' of insurance plan . Consider for example : a married insured whose Spouse relies upon their income to sustain the expenses of daily living . What is the ` Right Kind ' of Life Insurance plan and what is the ` Right Amount ' of death benefit ? Term Insurance 's disadvantage is the fact that very few deaths occur in the coverage period . Their need for income remains unprotected . Permanent plan 's disadvantage is the fact that only the wealthy can afford the face amounts required to support a Survivor 's need for lifetime income . Reversionary Annuity by design is the ` Right Kind ' of life insurance plan when Survivor Income is the need . It is much more affordable than Permanent plans and 100 % of the Surviving spouses will receive its benefit .
A deferred Annuity means your Taxes are not payed until you start taking money out of the account , tax-deferral . All Annuities have this tax deferral so it does not matter what kind of Annuity you get . An annuity is a contract between you and an insurance company . The annuity will credit money to your account according to the method which comes with the Annuity . There is so much more you need to know about annuities before you get one so please follow up with your Broker or contact me if you do not have one .
There are two genres of Life Insurance , -LRB- Term and Permanent -RRB- , but there are at least 10 different Kinds within those genres . So your question is a very important one to know the answer to ! Universal Life is most often referred to as Permanent insurance , but it 's really a hybrid of Term and Whole Life ... and it will expire and be void of cash value and any benefits at some point unless you ` over fund ' it . Unfortunately that part is rarely explained to people when buying insurance . The main kinds of Term Insurance are Mortgage , Credit and Life . They 're all basically the same in that they are in force for a limited period of time and pay the benefit amount to the named beneficiary upon the death of the insured . In the case of mortgage and credit policies the beneficiary is the mortgage or credit provider . In the case of Term Life usually the beneficiary is the spouse , children or other relative of the insured . Also with Term Life there may be an accelerated benefit rider that pays a percentage of the death benefit to the insured in the case of critical or chronic illness or injury . There are a large variety of Permanent Life policies available . Whole Life Paid Up at a predetermined age , -LRB- such as 65 , 95 , 121 , etc -RRB- , is the kind that never ` expires ' and continues to grow cash value until the benefit is paid . As mentioned above there are `` Universal Life '' policies , which can be ` fixed ' , ` indexed ' or ` variable ' . Indexed and variable are tied to the stock market with regard to their cash value , but all are a hybrid of term and permanent . There are other kinds of Whole Life designed for business partners , -LRB- Buy out -RRB- , and for businesses , -LRB- Key Man -RRB- , etc. . So when looking to implement life insurance your best bet is to utilize the services of an insurance Adviser who is not tied to just one provider and can be unbiased help you to determine the best policy for your specific needs and goals . Please contact me if you want more information .
Cigna health insurance plans normally cover at least a portion of the cost of hearing aids . Severe hearing loss is a health issue . There are different kinds of hearing loss and different kinds of hearing aids . Most health insurance plans have limits on the amount they will pay toward the cost of a hearing aid . Approved claims must meet specified standards for the degree of hearing loss .
There are a lot of different kinds of annuities available from dozens -LRB- perhaps even hundreds -RRB- of insurance companies . Annuities are offered by insurance companies and primarily used as a means of securing a steady cash flow during retirement years . In many ways , an annuity is very much like a pension plan offered by a company for retirement . Perhaps the best feature of an annuity is safety . Insurance companies are rated as a measurement of financial strength and have proven over the past 125 years or so to have financial stability second to no other type of financial institution . In today 's world where fewer and fewer employers offer a pension , planning for a reasonable retirement income stream seems to be challenging for most workers . An annuity -LRB- or even several -RRB- can provide the type of retirement income security that previous generations have enjoyed . Should an annuity be the only retirement income vehicle for you ? Absolutely not . Your retirement income plan should be balanced in a way that works for you . You should always seek the advice of a qualified retirement income planner so that strategies and products can be tailored to your individual situation .
That is an excellent question ! The answer is kind of difficult , though , as both are good for different reasons , and both might be bad for you for different reasons . Annuities are generally a safer vehicle for guaranteeing an income stream during retirement , as they typically will have provisions that will not allow you to lose your initial investment amount , even if everything else tanked . But annuities require that you set that initial investment aside for a number of years , and that can be an issue , if you have severe cash flow issues.Mutual funds can bring a greater return that a lot of annuities , but unless you have really done your homework , the fees associated with your fund can eat the return alive , and you can end up not making the return that you could have . Statistically most mutual funds make money , but again , if you invest in the wrong one , there 's no guarantee that you recoup your initial investment , let alone a profit . You also need to do the work to get the money out of your fund , unlike an annuity that has a set payment amount and schedule . A really solid retirement plan is diversified , and can include both types of investments ; If you 're forced to choose one or the other , that 's a decision that needs a lot of soul searching and planning , and a trusted adviser to help . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Critical Illness Insurance is offered in the UK , South Africa , Canada , Australia and Southeast Asia . The type of products offered in these countries has some differences from that offered in the US . `` Benefit in kind '' is a term used to apply to critical illness insurance in countries other than the US . From what I can tell , this type of policy is usually considered a benefit in kind , but you would need to check with a tax consultant to be sure .
The best kind of health insurance is the kind that is best for you . There 's a difference between the most comprehensive coverage and what is most suitable -LRB- or `` best '' -RRB- for you . Under the new Affordable Care Act , there are four main benefit levels of coverage - bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Platinum plans are going to provide the most comprehensive benefits , but will also feature the highest premiums . Not everyone will be able to afford a platinum plan , which is why bronze , silver , and gold are available as well . The idea being to reduce your premium , you take on a little more risk - meaning you 're willing to take on a higher deductible , higher coinsurance/copayment , etc. to keep your premiums down . Group coverage can provide many benefits as well , such as lower premiums -LRB- the employer contributes to a percentage of the premiums for each employees plan -RRB- - the trade-off to keep in mind is that for group plans , if you left the company or were fired , you lose the coverage . An individual plan will stay with you wherever you go . Because everyone 's needs and budgets are different as well as the plan types available to them , you need to talk to an agent about your specific situation so you can review and discuss the available options . If I can be of help , send me a private message using the `` contact me '' button .
First I 'd like to say that your question , `` Do I need life insurance now that I 'm getting married '' is a mature question that indicates you genuinely care about your future wife and family and are an intelligent thinker ! Good on ya ! The answer to whether you need insurance or not really relies on your financial strength and goals . If you have a few million dollars in liquid assets you probably do n't NEED insurance ... but you may still WANT to have Whole Life , Cash Value life insurance . The wealthiest people in the world typically are the biggest buyers of WL insurance , because of the value it has . On the other hand there are many people who are self insured feeling that the money they have acquired is sufficient to cover the needs of their family in the event of their demise . Obviously those people do n't know what the wealthiest people know about WL insurance . So in order to determine what kind of life insurance you should consider , -LRB- there are over 10 different kinds of life insurance -RRB- , and how much is appropriate , you should consult with a life insurance professional - preferably one who is not tied to just one provider and can help you to implement the program that will be the best for you . If you would like to talk about this further you can call or email me . I 'm only licensed in Hawaii , but I 'm happy to help you with the more important questions .
What kind of retirement plan is TRS ? A quick search reveals that TRS is short for teachers retirement system . These are state sponsored plans set up to provide retirement benefits for public school educators in their respective states . The plans themselves may be different in each state as well as different within each state as plans are altered at times for new hires . For example in my state there are currently three plans in action for the teachers retirement . The first was closed to new hires in 1977 and has about a 1000 teachers still working . The second was closed about a decade ago and is very different from the first and the third is still different from 1 or 2 . I expect a fourth to be introduced in the next 5 years .
Great question ! Accidental death is covered in all insurance policies . Dismemberment however , is not . The kind of policy that you are thinking of is often misunderstood . Some people think that it will serve as good life insurance , thinking that it will provide coverage that it usually does n't . This kind of policy does n't cover any kind of death related to illness or health issue , like cancer or stroke . The normal life insurance policy wo n't cover dismemberment , unless it results in your death . The two policies can be combined by purchasing a life insurance policy with an AD&D `` rider '' -LRB- the policy ` rides ' along on the other , bigger policy -RRB- for a little more in cost . That provides you with terrific coverage , for most any situation . If you need more information , please feel free to contact me , I 'm happy to help . Thanks for asking !
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
Can You Be Denied Medigap Insurance ?
Yes . If you do n't buy a Medigap plan during your initial open enrollment period -LRB- the 6-month window from your Medicare Part B effective date -RRB- , you can be subject to medical underwriting if you do not qualify for a special enrollment period . If you 're applying with medical underwriting , you have to answer the medical questions on a carrier 's application . Depending on the responses , they will approve or decline you . Keep in mind , each carrier has different health questions so some may work better for your medical history than others . The BEST TIME TO BUY a Medigap plan is during your initial open enrollment period because there is NO medical underwriting . This means that regardless of your health status , you can buy any Medigap plan from any carrier in your area , again , with NO medical underwriting ! I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
You can buy a Medigap Plan at any time during the year as long as you are enrolled in Medicare Part A and Part B . If you have Original Medicare Part A and Part B , you may want to consider buying a Medigap policy sooner rather than later . Original Medicare only covers generally 80 % of your medical costs , leaving you to pay the other 20 % -- as well as the Part A deductible -LRB- $ 1,216 in 2014 -RRB- and the Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . The best time to buy a Medigap Policy is during your initial Open Enrollment Period -LRB- the one time only , 6 month window when Federal law allows you to buy ANY Medigap Plan sold in your state -RRB- . During this period you can not be denied coverage . If you already have a Medigap Plan , you can buy a policy whenever you wish . You will just have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . Your application will have to approved through the medical underwriting department . It 's important to note that the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap Plans . If you have some health conditions , a Medicare Supplement Specialist can work with you to see which insurance companies might be good match for you . In some cases , you may have a Guaranteed Issue Right to purchase a Medigap Policy if you have other health care that changes in some way -- for example , you lose other health care coverage . This means you 'll get a small window of opportunity to purchase a Medigap Plan without being denied coverage . It ' s best to contact an independent agent specializing in Medicare Supplement insurance to help you determine if you are in this type of situation . Thank you for reading my response . Please let me know if I can assist you with your Medigap insurance needs .
Unfortunately , the Affordable Care Act does not apply to Medigap . If you have a pre-existing condition , you may be denied coverage . If you are not in your initial Open Enrollment period or another Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Policy . Therefore , it 's best to get a Medigap Policy when you think you do n't need one . Often times people wait until a health condition arises because they think the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- will apply . With that said , each insurance company has unique health questions . One insurance company may deny rheumatoid arthritis while another is okay with it . In other words , do n't assume you will be denied . An independent agent can review your health history and let you know if you can apply for a Medigap policy .
The short answer is it depends . When you turn 65 and start your Medicare Part B you will get a 6 month window where you can choose any Medigap Insurance Plan you like . There will be no health questions and you can not be denied . After you turn 65 and are past the 6 month window of signing up for Medicare Part B then you can still get a Medigap Plan . With most carriers there will be 10-12 health questions that you will need to answer in order to get approved . Working with an independent agent that specializes in Medigap Insurance will help you to choose the insurance carrier that fits your health situation the best . Most of the health questions are centered around big and recent health issues . I would not be concerned with getting denied I would just contact an expert to help you through the process . Once you have a Medigap Insurance it is guaranteed renewable which means it can never be canceled on you as long as you pay the premiums . I would be happy to answer any other questions you have .
If you 're applying for a Medigap plan outside of your initial open enrollment period , you can be denied for coverage depending on your health history and responses to the health questions on the application . The best time to apply for a Medigap plan is during your initial open enrollment period because you can apply for any Medigap plan from any carrier and you can not be denied for coverage due to any pre-existing conditions or other health-related illnesses . The initial open enrollment period is a 6-month window that starts from your Medicare Part B effective date . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
A Medigap Policy -LRB- Medicare Supplement insurance -RRB- offers great peace of mind when it comes to your health care . Original Medicare Part A and Part B , generally cover 80 % of your Medicare approved amounts for covered medical costs . Medigap Plans will help pay that remaining 20 % by covering the costs of copays , coinsurance , and deductibles . Some people think they do n't need a Medigap Plan because they have n't had any health issues . While that is great news , we do n't have a crystal ball to predict the future . A Medigap Plan that is already in place is there to offer that protection when you need it . If you wait until a significant health issue arises , it may be too late . Medicare Supplement insurance companies use medical underwriting to issue policies . If you 're not in a Guaranteed Issue or Initial Enrollment situation , you will have to answer health questions . Medigap policies do not fall under the Affordable Care Act umbrella , so insurance companies can deny you a policy based on your health . I 'll close with an example of a lady who called me wanting to add a Medigap Plan to her Original Medicare Part A and Part B . She was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a mastectomy . As you can imagine , her hospital and doctor bills were substantial and she was looking for some help . I had to share the unfortunate news with her that because of her recent diagnosis she would not be able to apply for a Medigap policy at this time , but possibly in two years we could re-evaluate her situation . That 's quite a bit of time for more bills to pile up . Had she already put a Medigap Plan in place , her savings would be substantial . Just for example sake , a Medigap Plan F might cost someone $ 130 a month or $ 1,560 over twelve months . Still a lot lower than 20 % of a $ 100,000 operation . A couple of the most popular Medigap Plans are Plan F and Plan G. & nbspMedigap Plan F will cover all Medicare approved amounts . You do not have to pay any deductibles , co-insurance , or co-pays . Plan G acts just like Plan F after you have met the small Part B deductible -LRB- $ 147 in 2014 -RRB- . If you would like more information about the benefits of Medigap Plans , please feel free to contact me at 1-888-411-1329 . You can also visit my website at www.remedigap.com and check out my client testimonials .
The claim can be denied for fraud . Some companies refer suspected fraud to prosecutors . The claim can be denied if there wasnt any coverage . It can be denied if the policy was cancelled . It can be denied if the report was made too late . The denial of a claim is a very serious matter and companies are generally reluctant to deny a claim . If you had a claim denied you can seek recourse through the courts .
Since all Medigap plans are standardized , the benefits are exactly the same with every insurance company . This means that Medigap Plan F with ABC insurance company is the exact same Medigap Plan F with XYZ insurance company . The only difference is price . Medicare does not regulate the price of Medigap Plans ... just the benefits . That 's why there is such a competitive market . Many Medicare Beneficiaries like the idea of purchasing Medigap through a well known insurance company , but that does n't mean you are going to get the best price . Medigap is not like health insurance for under age 65 where a Medical director approves or denies your bills . Medigap payments are made by the insurance carrier if it 's a Medicare approved item because they have to -- it 's the law . I suppose that was the long way of saying there is n't one insurance company that has the best Medigap coverage . They all offer the same standardized plans and pay the bills based upon CMS regulations .
If you apply for Medigap coverage during your initial enrollment period -LRB- usually at age 65 -RRB- you can not be denied coverage . Also , there are specified guaranteed issue situations where a carrier can not deny your application . These situations include losing an Advantage plan , losing your employer group health insurance plan -LRB- past age 65 -RRB- or if your current Medigap carrier exits the market or goes bankrupt . Outside of specified guaranteed issue situations , you can buy a Medigap plan at any time subject to medical underwriting .
You can be denied Medigap coverage if you have serious pre-existing health conditions . Once your Part B Medicare coverage is activated at age 65 or older , you have six months to enroll in a Medicare Supplement without having to answer any health questions . After your Open Enrollment Period ends you can enroll in a Medigap Plan at anytime , but you could pay a higher rate or be denied coverage for serious health problems .
Unfortunately , the Affordable Care Act does not make it easier to buy a Medigap Plan . If you have a pre-existing health condition , the insurance companies can turn you down . Therefore , the best time to buy a Medigap plan is when you think you do n't need one . If you are over 65 and out of your initial Open Enrollment Period , you will have to answer the health questions on the Medigap application . Each insurance company is unique with their health questions -- as is each person with their health history . While one insurance carrier might deny you for having rheumatoid arthritis , another insurance company may approve your application . That is why it 's a great idea to work with a Medicare Supplement specialist . In just a few minutes , we can review your health history and determine which insurance companies may be the best match for you . If I can assist you with your personal Medigap needs , please feel free to contact me .
You can switch Medigap policies at any time , but it is important to understand potential obstacles . If you are outside of your Medigap open enrollment period -LRB- the 6-month period that begins on the first day of the month in which you 're 65 or older and enrolled in Part B -RRB- , then you will likely have to go through health underwriting to switch to a new plan or insurance company . Some companies do allow you to change your Medigap Plan if you remain with them , e.g. going from a Plan F to a Plan G , without new health underwriting ; but if you change insurance companies you will have to answer all health questions on the application . A new insurance company may deny you coverage based upon evaluation of your current health , so you may not be able to switch your Medigap policy to a new company . It is important to work with a licensed and experienced agent who can place you with a reputable company for the long term when you are in your Medigap open enrollment period .
Every Medicare Beneficiary gets a 6 month period when you are allowed to buy any Medigap Plan that 's sold in your state . This Open Enrollment Period starts in the first month your ' e covered under Medicare Part B , AND you 're 65 or older . This Open Enrollment Period is only available one time . It 's a great opportunity to get a Medigap Plan during this time because you ca n't be denied a Policy due to current or past health conditions . If you 've been on Medicare Part B for more than 6 months , then you are out of the initial Open Enrollment Period . However , you CAN still apply for a Medigap Plan -- you 'll just have to answer the health questions on the application . If you already have Medigap coverage and want to switch Medigap Plans , you can apply for a new Plan any time of the year . Since there are many moving parts to Medicare , you may benefit from speaking with an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance . I am happy to help you with your specific situation .
Most people can switch Medigap companies . If your premium is getting too high , it 's a great idea to have it reviewed and see if you can qualify for a rate reduction with another insurance company . If you are out of your initial Open Enrollment period or not eligible for a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan . If you can qualify medically , you can switch Medigap companies any time of the year . Qualifying means you have to answer the health questions on the insurance company application . The insurance company will usually do a phone interview with you and verify your prescription drugs . They will not have anyone come to your house and perform a medical exam . All insurance companies are unique with their health questions -- as is each individual 's health . One company may deny coverage based on diabetes while taking blood pressure medications while another company will approve coverage . You just never know ; that 's why it 's in your best interest to work with an agent who has access to many insurance companies . If I can assist you with your personal Medigap needs , please feel free to contact me .
People should not apply for life insurance policies for which they know they will be denied . You can know ahead with some policies because they have criteria that you must meet . E.g. . They may not approve if you use oxygen , or if you weigh over a certain amount . Sometimes , the only way you can know if you will be denied is by asking an agent who is familiar with that company 's underwriting guidelines . Sometimes , people apply for policies where they are not sure if they will be denied or not . I.e. . They have risk factors , but appear to meet the underwriting guidelines . It is not always possible to be able to tell ahead of time whether you will be declined or not . The final word will come from the underwriter after the underwriter reviews your medical records . One thing is certain : you can decrease your chance of being declined by using an agent who understands your health and risk factors , and who can match you up to the policy that best meets your needs . Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have a risk that might cause your life insurance to be denied . I can help you avoid an unnecessary decline and help you find an affordable policy .
In general , you can change your Medigap Plan any time of the year . You will have to medically qualify for a new Medigap Plan -- unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation -LRB- the rights you have in certain situations when insurance companies are bound by law to sell you a Medigap Policy and ca n't deny you because of current or past health issues -RRB- . To qualify medically , means you have to answer the health questions on the insurance carrier 's application and list prescription medications taken in the last 12 - 24 months . Every insurance company 's health questions are unique , as is each individual . A licensed independent agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance is a great resource for helping you find which insurance companies you may qualify with -- and , which ones have the best premiums for the Medigap Plan benefits you want . Thank you for reading my response . If I can help you with your specific situation , please feel free to contact me .
In New York State a life insurance company can deny a claim if the insured commits suicide during the first two years of the policy being in force . The suicide exclusion period varies from state to state , but you can easily find the specifics for your state by going to your states insurance department web site . There is precedent for an insurance company to deny a claim even after the standard two year contestable period in the case of fraud . Part of the reason for the limitation on the contestable period is to protect the insured from having his claim denied for a relatively minor misstatement on the application . However the intent was never to reward fraudulent activity . An example of fraud would be a person who knows he is HIV positive but does not disclose it on the application , then he has a friend stand in his place for the exam and blood test . Even if the insured dies after the contestable period the company can deny the claim if they can prove fraud .
No you can not `` run out of Medicare '' , Medicare does not have a lifetime cap . This means that your medicare coverage will pay according to its current coverage level for as long as your claims are being approved . However , Medicare can deny a claim based on a number of factors on a case by case basis . If a claim is denied by Medicare you will not be covered for that particular treatment . A denied claim does not mean that your medicare has been completely exhausted , it just means that Medicare has determined the treatment does not qualify for coverage . If you have a Medicare Supplement plan you should know that if Medicare denies a claim your supplement plan will not pay at all . If you would like more information on you medicare supplement coverage please visit www.themedigapmarket.com or for more info on your medicare coverage www.medicare.gov .
A life insurance policy must be in force to pay benefits to the beneficiary . Life insurance companies have denied claims for several reasons . There is an exclusion for suicide within the first two years of most policies . Claims have been denied for failure to report important medical conditions . Sometimes the company will deny a claim when the death occurs under unusual circumstances . When a claim is denied the premiums are generally returned .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Is Globe Life Insurance Legit ?
Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company began in 1951 in Oklahoma City Oklahoma and is a subsidiary of Torchmark Corporation . The company has more than 66 billion in force . In 1972 , Globe Life created Employee Services Division to service the Government organizations . It is one of the largest direct to consumer insurance companies in the U.S. .
Yes , American Income Life -LRB- AKA AIL -RRB- is located in Waco , TX . They wereformed with the name American Income Lifein 1954 . The owners of the company had operated under the name American Income as early as 1951 . They were purchased by Torchmark Corporation in 1994 for 563 million dollars . They are a legit insurance company .
Yes . If by asking if they are good you mean `` Do they pay their death claim when the insured dies ? '' All life insurance companies pay their legit death claims . To know if Knights of Columbus is a good value for you , you just need to compare the rate -LRB- monthly premium -RRB- to what you can get from other life insurance companies . You will probably find they are competitive at some ages and not at others . All life insurance companies have certain `` sweet spots '' that they are good with and others that they are not . LIke all Fraternal Benefit Societies , Knights of Columbus is not protected by any state guarantee funds so you may need to sign a waiver that you are aware of that in some states . You should study what that means at your state 's Department of Insurance website . Knights of Columbus -LRB- like all fraternals -RRB- does not issue life insurance POLICIES . They issue certificates of coverage , not policies . There is a difference and you should make certain that you understand the pluses and minuses of each before making a commitment .
American Income Life is a legal insurance company . This company uses brokers to sell their products who are paid on commission . There are a lot of complaints online however when you really down to it , it seems brokers are not being clear as to the product they are purchasing or the brokers are given leads to follow up with people who are responding to some add to get free accidental dismemberment and death insurance . Just like any lead , the broker has to find the need which in this case , may not be one . Your simple answer is YES , they are Legit .
Under no circumstances can they term you without a reason . The reasons are also limited as to why the can term you . They can not kick you off the plan due to health conditions you acquired while you had the plan . When you hear rumors of people getting kicked off their plan because they became sick , they are just that , rumors . Failure to pay premium , plan discontinuation , employer dropping the plan , moving out of the plans service area are the main reasons a person would lose their coverage . They can not cancel insurance because someone has been incurring a high number of claims . I would suggest there must be some type of error with your cancellation . You should call the insurance company and ask them why they have termed you . They will have an answer whether it is legit or not is a different story but if they have termed you due to some error , you will be able to get reinstated .
It 's easy to shop the rates with online quoters . It will vary depending on your age , zip code , tobbacco use , gender , etc. . Also which plan you choose will greatly affect the cost . My own site has a free online quoter you can use . It 's located at WEBSITELINK I recommend doing your research online but always find a local broker to purchase through . You will usually have a much better relationship and Medicare Supplements are not a one time purchase . The broker you buy from is your employee until you choose to fire him . He is your 1st call if you have a billing problem , question , or rate increase . When shopping rates online do NOT enter your correct name , address , phone number or anything to identify you until AFTER you have decided to buy . Most quoting sites look legit but are really data collecting sites that will sell your info as an insurance lead . You will have 50-insurance agents calling you all at once . Only use sites that will quote you the rates and everything you need to research and then YOU choose the agent you want to call . You will have a much better experience doing it that way .
I could not find any indication that Globe Life is associated with CMFG , but called Globe Life to confirm . Their representative said that if your policy is with Globe Life , your statement should say Globe Life . It may be that you have a policy with `` globe '' in the product title , or got your policy through Global Credit Union ?
That is a great question ! Globe Life is a subsidiary of Torchmark , A Fortune 500 financial services company . they were originally Liberty National Insurance company until 1980 when they acquired Globe Life , and formed the torchmark holding company . My best guess would be that they have a portion of that company that handles their banking , that most likely goes through CUNA , -LRB- Credit Union National Association -RRB- , the marketing group for your mysterious CMFG -LRB- CUNA became CMFG in 2012 -RRB- . Or CMFG bought a part of Globe 's life business , which is a fairly common practice - The big financial companies buy/sell blocks of mortgages and other investments that may include life insurance policies in order to earn more money themselves . It may be that the CMFG people -LRB- who sell services to credit unions and consumers -RRB- bought a chunk of Globes business , with yours in it . I 'd call Globe , or drop them an email to their customer service people and ask them why , and make sure you know who owns your policy , so you know who to contact/collect from . It can be very confusing when high finance starts swapping assets , and we little folk try to keep track ... I had a mortgage that was sold 4 times that I know of ! Good luck , I would n't worry too much , just be sure . Thanks for asking !
Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company was rated A + by AM Best in 2012 . This company , like every life insurance company , has their niche . Globe Life 's niche is doing policies online and through the mail . While handy , they do not allow people to get as much life insurance as they might want , and going through medical underwriting can save many people money vs buying No Exam coverage online . Whether Globe Life Insurance is good for you depends on what you want and what you are willing to pay .
Per Globe Life 's website , Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Touchmark Corporation , which is a holding company that specializes in life and supplemental health insurance , and has its main office in McKinney , TX . Globe Life 's home office is located in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma .
If you have a Globe Whole Life insurance policy that has accumulated cash value beyond any surrender charges or outstanding loans , you will most likely be able to cash it in . Call Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company at 972-540-6542 with your policy number to talk to a representative and see if you are able to cash in your Globe Life insurance policy .
The price of Globe Life Insurance depends on the type of policy you purchase , your age , gender , and other factors . So it is impossible to state a dollar amount for Globe Life Insurance . While the company offers some good rates , their choices for coverage are not too extensive . So you may want to contact Globe to see what rate you can get , then compare it with other companies using the quote engines provided on many websites .
Globe Life Insurance , well known for its $ 1 advertisement for the first month 's premium , is an A + rated carrier . As such , they are financially strong . My issue with Globe is in the small print . The level premium increases every 5 years making it virtually impossible for the insured 's to keep a policy at older ages . Most everyone I speak with about Globe was unaware of this important feature . Buyer beware !
As Peggy stated above , if your Globe policy is a whole life policy and has grown some cash value the you should be able to borrow against it . However I would advise you to first find out what the interest rate is and if Globe uses `` direct recognition '' regarding policy loans . Because Globe is a stock company therefore the policy holders do not enjoy the sharing of dividends as with a mutual company . So you may be better off taking a loan from a bank if you ca get a low interest loan . For more on how `` Direct Recognition '' affects a policy loan and why it is imperative that you know their policy before taking a loan , please see the article here : WEBSITELINK
Globe life insurance markets term life insurance , whole life insurance , accidental death insurance , mortgage protection plans , and medicare supplements . Two versions of the whole life policies do build up cash value that you can borrow against . The Children 's whole life policy is called `` The Young American Plan '' and there is a Whole Life policy that adults can purchase . The face amounts of Globe policies are pretty low so if you are looking for policies to accumulate cash , there are better options available .
Globe life insurance is an A + rated life insurance company that has been around since 1951 . Globe offers term insurance , whole life insurance and children 's insurance . They have a deal where you pay $ 1 for the first month and then your premium is based on your age at the time of issue .
Do you mean Globe Life ? Globe Life is a life insurance company that offers final expense , accident , and mortgage protection insurance . They are certainly a legitimate insurer that focuses more on middle and working class families to offer them smaller insurance policies to meet financial obligations these people generally do not have the money on hand to meet .
Global Life Insurance is a reference to Globe Life Insurance . Globe is a company that sells life insurance online and through the mail . While popular with those who want smaller policies with little effort , it may not work for those who want larger policies or who want to shop for the lowest price .
Per their website , you can borrow money from a Globe Life Insurance policy . The policy must be Whole Life that you have had long enough to build up a cash value . You can take out a policy loan to borrow against the cash value that has built up in your Globe Whole Life policy .
Globe Life and Accident Insurance Company began in 1951 in Oklahoma City Oklahoma and is a subsidiary of Torchmark Corporation . The company has more than 66 billion in force . In 1972 , Globe Life created Employee Services Division to service the Government organizations . It is one of the largest direct to consumer insurance companies in the U.S. .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Is Health Insurance Before Taxes ?
If you purchase your coverage through an employer , you may have the option to utilize a 125 plan to have pre-tax dollars withheld from your pay check to pay your premiums . However , for the vast majority of individuals purchasing their own coverage , insurance premiums are paid for with taxable dollars . One exception to this rule is anyone that is self employed , who is allowed to write off the cost of their health insurance on their tax return . However , even in such a case , the self employed individual must still FICA/self-employment taxes on these funds .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
When you filed your federal tax return for 2014 -- sometime before April 15 , 2014 -- you may have realized for the first time that failure to have purchased health insurance in 2014 subjected you to a special tax penalty , known to tax lawyers as a `` shared responsibility payment . '' Last year , 2014 , was the first year for which tax penalties were assessed for failure to obtain health insurance . You will be assessed a similar penalty for the present tax year , 2015 , unless you purchase insurance for this year . Normally , you would be required to purchase insurance by February 15 - the end of the open enrollment period for the year . However , if you can claim that you were not aware of the tax penalties until recently , applicable regulations extend that deadline and allow you to purchase insurance up to April 30 , 2015 . The tax penalties for not obtaining health insurance are significant , and they are going up in 2015 . For example , a single person with income of $ 40,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 300 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be about $ 600 . A married couple with two children and joint income of $ 70,000 , paid a penalty of about $ 500 in 2014 , but in 2015 the penalty would be almost $ 1,000 . You can take advantage of this special extended enrollment opportunity through Covered California , the health insurance marketplace established by the State of California under the Affordable Care Act to make it easier for Californians to shop for , compare and purchase private health insurance . Depending upon your income , you may qualify for subsidies that will reduce the cost of health insurance to you and your family . You have a number of insurance options available to you through Covered California . In general , you can purchase a bronze , silver , gold or platinum policy -- the bronze policies have lower co-pays and premiums , but also offer more limited coverage and higher deductibles . Platinum policies are more expensive and offer greater coverage . Silver and gold policies fall between . Depending upon where you live , you can purchase policies from the following private insurers on the Covered California marketplace : Anthem , Blue Shield , Chinese Community Health Plan , Health Net , Kaiser Permanente , LA Care , Molina Healthcare , Sharp Health Plan , Valley Health and Western Health Advantage . If you do not wish to purchase insurance through Covered California , you may still take advantage of the extended enrollment period through April 30 . Private insurers have been authorized to extend enrollment to April 30 -LRB- from the normal cut-off of February 15 -RRB- to those Californians who had not been aware of the tax penalties for failure to purchase insurance . Insurers are not obligated to extend the standard enrollment period , but a number of them have , including Kaiser Permanente , Anthem , and Blue Shield . However , please note that if you qualify for subsidized health coverage , the subsidies are only available if you purchase your health policy on the Covered California market . Two additional quick notes : If you qualify for Medi-Cal , you may apply at any time . You are not subject to the April 30 - or any other -- application deadline . And if you are the subject of certain major changes in your life -LRB- for example , loss of health coverage through your employment , marriage , move to California -RRB- , you may enroll in an insurance program after such event . However , in all other circumstances , if you want to avoid paying a tax penalty when you file your taxes next year , take advantage of this special enrollment extension and purchase an eligible health insurance policy by April 30 , 2015 .
Yes , though there are significant differences between the treatment of health insurance premiums for tax purposes for persons with individual and group health insurance policies . If you are self-employed and purchase individual health insurance then this expense can be deducted directly on your Form 1040 as an adjustment to income . This will help reduce your taxable income and thus your income tax , it will not , however , reduce your self-employment tax . For the self-employed using a high deductible plan paired with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- then amounts contributed towards the HSA also reduce your taxable income while setting aside tax sheltered dollars for future use . Of course , other medical expenses not reimbursed by health insurance are a deduction as well but these expenses must exceed 10 % of your Adjusted Gross Income , a very high hurdle to clear unless you are dealing with some very serious , high cost health problems . The higher 10 % threshold is one of the consequences of the Affordable Care Act as the threshold was previously set at 7.5 % . For employed persons who get employer sponsored health insurance the income tax impact is usuallyexperienced through the use of an employer sponsoredSection 125 plan . Section 125 of the IRS code allows for employee contributions towards health and other eligible insurance plans to be taken out of the employee 's paychecks on a pre-tax basis . Deducting employee contributions on a pre-tax basis reduces the employee 's gross income and thus lowers their net taxable income resulting in lower Federal income tax , Social Security tax and state income tax -LRB- if applicable in your state -RRB- withholding amounts by an amount roughly equivalent to the employee 's tax bracket . Eligible medical expenses not reimbursed or covered by the employer based health plan are a deductible expense though they are subject to the same 10 % of Adjusted Gross Income threshold as described previously.Employee contributions to a Health Savings Account for an employer sponsored HSA eligible high deductible health insurance plans reduce the employee 's taxable gross income in the same way was described in the previous paragraph . Of course , you should discuss your particular tax situation and strategy with you CPA and/or tax lawyer as everyone 's situation is unique .
The health insurance premium tax credit is a creation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and first became available January 1 , 2014 . In general , individuals and families whose income falls between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level will qualify for some level of subsidy for health insurance that they purchase through the Federal or state health insurance marketplaces in the person 's state of residence . The amount of premium credit a person qualifies for is based upon a sliding scale that is highest at the low end of the Federal Poverty Level and declines to almost nothing as a person gets to the 400 % level . A person can only receive this premium tax credit for health insurance plans they purchase through the government health insurance marketplace . You do have a choice when you learn that you qualify for a premium tax credit . You can choose to receive it in the form of an `` Advanced Premium Tax Credit '' or you can wait until you do your annual taxes and capture it at that time . With the `` Advanced Premium Tax Credit '' choice your credit amount will be sent to the insurance carrier you select each month to pay a portion of your monthly premium and you will be balance billed for the rest . If you opt to pay for your health insurance in full and then claim your credit on your income taxes the amount of the credit you qualified for would be included in any income tax refund you receive . This might be a very important choice . Your premium subsidy will be based upon what you estimate your income will be in the coming year . If you guess wrong and receive a higher subsidy than it turns out you actually qualified for based on the income you report on your income tax form for that year then the overpayment can be withheld from any income tax refund you might have had coming . Conversely , if you made less than you had projected you would find your possible income tax refund increased by the remaining subsidy amount you would have qualified for . While the premium tax subsidies do provide a mechanism to assist persons in certain income levels to purchase health insurance they might not have otherwise been able to afford , it will also complicate the income tax filing process for many of these people .
Qualified funds are funds that get special tax treatment through some particular provisions of the IRS code . IRA 's , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- 's and 403 -LRB- b -RRB- 's are all examples of qualified plans . It sounds like you have been making these contributions directly -LRB- ie : not through payroll deduction -RRB- , so your Variable Annuity is most likely an IRA . If that is the case it could be either a traditional IRA or a Roth IRA . The tax ramifications of your withdrawal will be different depending which type of IRA it is . As always , you should consult with your tax adviser before making any decisions . If you have a traditional IRA you most likely took a deduction on your tax return each year for your $ 1,200 contribution . If that is the case , the full amount of any withdrawal will be taxable . In addition you will pay a 10 % early withdrawal penalty since you are not 591/2 . If you have a Roth IRA you did not get a deduction on your tax return for your contributions . With a Roth IRA you can withdraw the total of your contributions without taxes or penalty . Any earnings that you withdraw will be subject to taxes and a 10 % early withdrawal penalty . If it is a Roth IRA you may want to consider withdrawing your contributions only . You can then leave the earnings in the account until you are 591/2 at which time they can be withdrawn tax free . I would reinforce that some seemingly minor details can have a significant impact on the effect of the withdrawal on your taxes . Please talk with your tax adviser before finalizing your decision as to what to do .
With the requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- that became effective January 1 , 2014 , the differences in what group and individual health insurance cover are virtually nonexistent . The removal of underwriting , pre-existing condition exclusions and/or limitations and the addition of guaranteed issue and maternity coverage to both policy types has furthered leveled the playing field between group health and individual health insurance products . The crucial advantage group health plans continue to enjoy versus their individual market counterparts are tax issue related . What an employer contributes towards the health insurance coverage of their employees is a deductible business expense and in some small group cases may even qualify for a tax credit . In addition , employees can pay for their share of group health premiums using pre-tax dollars under a Section 125 Plan . Pre-tax treatment of employee contributions not only saves employee 's money , it reduces net taxable payroll which in turn lowers employer FICA matching expenses which is a further tax savings . For most individuals who purchase and pay for individual health insurance on their own there are none of these associated tax benefits . That is not to say that some individuals can not structure their business affairs to get some tax advantages in the individual marketplace but , after the ACA , our system is now set up to continue to tax favor group policies versus individual policies and to tax favor individual health insurance policies via subsidies up to certain income levels up to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- .
A 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and a Roth IRA are two very different retirement plans . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- is a plan that is established and administered by your employer . The rules for the plan are detailed in a plan document available from your employer . These plans are individualized and may include participation by your employer . Money contributed to your plan by your employer is free money . Free money is the very best kind of money . As a rule of thumb you should consider participating in a 401 -LRB- k -RRB- plan up to the limit that the employer will match . Your contribution and your employers contribution flow into the plan before taxes . That means that the amount you contribute comes out of your paycheck before you get it . As a result there arent any taxes on that portion that goes into the plan . In order to put $ 100 into a plan it might take only $ 75 in reduced income because of the taxes . That is an example , not even a projection . The Roth IRA is an individual plan . You establish a Roth IRA on your own . The money you contribute to the Roth IRA is not deducted from your paycheck and is not deductible from your income tax . The rules for the Roth IRA are in the Internal Revenue Code -LRB- IRC . -RRB- The money in both the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- and the Roth IRA will accumulate and earn free of current income tax . This is a tremendous advantage and should be strongly considered . There is a tax penalty for withdrawing the money prior to age 50.5 years . The Roth IRA might escape the penalty , but the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- will not . When money is withdrawn from the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- the distribution will be taxed as ordinary income . This money has not been taxed previously . It will all be taxed upon distribution . In addition when you reach age 70.5 the government will require minimum distributions each year that force the money in the 401 -LRB- k -RRB- to be taken as ordinary income . Money can be withdrawn from a Roth IRA free of income tax so long as a couple of conditions are met . The Roth IRA is not subject to the minimum required distributions and may be passed to heirs free of income tax . There are rules involved but careful planning can generally avoid income tax altogether on distributed funds . As you can see these plans are different and yet you might want to have both . The 401 -LRB- k -RRB- contributions can be much greater than the Roth IRA . There are also limits on participating in a Roth IRA . Having both tax deferred and tax-free income can give you great flexibility in retirement .
Disclaimer : The following answer is not to be considered tax advice . Contact a qualified tax professional before making any financial decision . Yes , long-term care premium payments may be tax deductible . It depends on the tax status of the individual or business entity filing an IRS tax report . The IRS annually publishes the limits on the amount of premium that can be entered into the tax return and where to enter that amount for consideration of tax deductibility . For non-business consideration , that would currently be `` Medical expenses '' in Schedule A . If by adding the allowable portion of the LTCi premium to Medical expenses causes the total amount of medical expenses to exceed the threshold -LRB- formerly 7.5 % of AGI , going forward 10 % of AGI -RRB- , then the amount beyond that threshold may be deductible . If not , then the allowable portion of the LTCi premium would not qualify for deduction . For business consideration , the portion of the premium allowable for possible tax deductibility is usually reported on Schedule C . At the present time , only a C-corporation may have 100 % of the LTCi premium considered for deductibility . The allowable amounts of LTCi premium for tax deductible consideration are age-based . For insured-ages 40 and under , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 360 . For those ages 71 and over , the published allowable amount of the LTCi premium for 2013 is $ 4550 . Between that minimum and maximum are various age brackets with different allowable amounts . Those amounts will be adjusted for income-tax-year 2014 and each year thereafter , under current tax law . Tax preparers , accountants , tax attorneys , and tax-preparation software are informed and are updated for each tax year .
That is a great question ! Roth IRA 's are excellent retirement savings vehicles . I think they should be a part of every retirement plan . When you make contributions to a plan , you make them either before income tax is assessed , or after the tax has been taken . Before tax , like your employer plan , means that the withdrawals are treated as income , and they are taxed then . After tax contributions , like your Roth , means that you have already paid your taxes , so the withdrawals are tax free . I hope that helps , thank you for asking !
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
You 've touched on one of the inequities of our system , the essentially unequal tax treatment of individual versus group health insurance . Group health insurance plans are tax advantaged in two ways ; 1 -RRB- what the employer pays towards coverage is a deductible business expense , and 2 -RRB- the employee 's share of their insurance premium costs can be deducted from their paychecks on a pretax basis and reducing their net cost of buying health insurance . Neither of these tax advantages apply to individual health insurance coverage a person might purchase for themselves . Though , as of January 1 , 2014 , under the provisions of the Affordable Care Act , person 's purchasing individual health insurance through the government marketplaces may qualify for an advanced premium tax subsidy depending upon their income level . So , in simple terms , in the group health insurance world you may be able to pay for your portion of your health insurance on a pre-tax basis but in the individual health insurance world you are generally in a post-tax payment environment -LRB- I 'm not going to stray into how some small business owners structure their business expenses and taxes as it regards these matters -RRB- .
Yes . Pre-existing health conditions such as Lupus can no longer be subject to a pre-existing condition exclusion , waiting period or be the cause for declining to cover a person . Now comes the part where I may part company with some of my peers . Unless you know a lot about health insurance and all the ins and outs of what the Affordable Care Act has caused insurance companies to do in redesigning their products , provider networks and prescription formularies , do n't go to Healthcare.gov for anything more than a cursory examination of what your options might be in the government marketplace and whether you will qualify for any subsidies . You can get a reasonable estimate of these factors without having to set up an account on Healthcare.gov through web sites such as HealthSherpa.com . Persons with chronic diseases , such as Lupus , especially need the services of an experienced health insurance broker who knows the intricacies of the health insurance products sold both inside and outside of the government health insurance marketplace . It is not enough to just see that a particular health insurance carrier is available in the government marketplace and your decision should not be guided solely by the monthly premium . The person with a chronic health condition generally has existing relationships with primary and specialty care providers and may have already gone through a lengthy process of finding the correct medication -LRB- s -RRB- and services for the treatment of their condition . They may even want or require access to medical facilities and providers outside of their immediate area . YOU CAN NOT TAKE FOR GRANTED THAT ALL INSURANCE CARRIERS AND THEIR PRODUCTS , ESPECIALLY THOSE SOLD WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT MARKETPLACE , WILL HAVE YOUR PHYSICIANS OR FACILITIES AS IN-NETWORK PROVIDERS OR THAT YOUR MEDICATIONS WILL BE COVERED UNDER THEIR FORMULARY . Also , access to major centers of excellence like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic , Memorial Sloan-Kettering and others certainly can not be assumed . This is a major issue especially among health plans sold in the government marketplaces where positioning your product based upon price point is key to marketing success . One of the ways that some carriers have achieved this price point positioning is through the use of so called `` skinny '' networks . Which , as their name implies , offer a reduced selection of providers and often a much more stringent and restrictive list of approved medications . Before you enroll in any health insurance plan you need to confirm with both the insurance carrier and the heath care provider -LRB- s -RRB- that all or at least as many as possible of the pieces of your care system are going to be available to you . You also need to confirm in what manner they will be available to you . Can you continue to go directly to the specialists you have been using or must you have a referral from your primary care physician before you can access that specialist now ? Will your current medication arrangement be honored or will you have to reinvent the wheel by going through a step therapy process of using other medications and having unsatisfactory results before your current medication is approved by the new carrier ? What if you have been going to a center of excellence facility out of town once a year for follow-up exams and treatment , will the new carrier allow this ? These are just some of the crucial questions any person suffering from a chronic disease needs to ask and get answered before they choose a health plan in the era of the Affordable Care Act .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
Could be . Since I am not a certified accountant , I can not give tax advice but here are the parameters for possible tax-advantaged treatment to discuss with a tax professional : 1 . Every year the IRS publishes the formula of percentage of premium by age that can be used for favorable tax treatment on the 1040 tax return . This formula is updated on various tax preparation software programs every year and certainly qualified tax advisors know what it is . It is also public information that can be obtained at various websites .2 . If the premium causes one to exceed the minimum percentage of health care costs on Schedule A , that amount above the minimum percentage could be deductible .3 . If one is a business owner , the above mention formula may be used on Schedule C to determine the deduction allowable as an amount paid for health insurance premiums .4 . C-corps may be able to ignore the IRS formula and deduct 100 % of the long-term care insurance premium on Schedule C.There may be other situations in which the payment of LTCi premium is treated in a tax-favorable manner . This is a topic for discussion with a qualified tax advisor before a consumer should make any assumptions about the tax treatment of the payment of long-term care insurance premiums .
Many employees have been surprised and concerned to see the value of their employer provided health insurance being reported on their W2 's . This is a requirement of the Affordable Care Act . Under transitional relief guidelines issued , so far only employers who issue 250 or more W2 forms in a calendar year are required to report this information . Eventually all employers who provide health insurance to their employees will be required to report this information on the employee 's W2 . This reporting of the employer paid amount for health insurance is for `` informational '' purposes only and is not being added to the employee 's gross income for income tax purposes . There are some skeptics who see this as a precursor to the eventual tax treatment of employer paid health insurance as employee income at some future date but at this time there is nothing in the Affordable Care Act or any pending legislation that would do this . Where this reporting of employer paid health insurance will become a tax issue will be in 2018 when the `` Cadillac Tax '' portion of the health care law goes into effect . The Cadillac Tax will be a 40 % excise tax imposed on health insurance plans whose annual premium costs exceed $ 10,200 for an individual or $ 27,500 for family coverage -LRB- these amounts will be indexed for inflation -RRB- . So , an employer in 2018 who finds themselves with health plan premium levels exceeding these amounts will be assessed a 40 % tax penalty . While such annual premium amounts may seem unreachable by many persons in 2014 . In some areas of the country , and especially with some very rich collectively bargained plans , total costs are already coming close to these trigger points . When one observes the increases in group health insurance plan costs already triggered by the requirements of the Affordable Care Act in 2014 and applies projected inflationary trend increases over the next few years it becomes much easier to estimate that a larger portion of employer based plans could find themselves subject to this tax penalty . This is one of the underlying motivations for more employers to move to high deductible health insurance plans in order to reduce their premium costs .
That is a great question ! When you make contributions to your Roth IRA , those contributions are made after you are taxed on them . When you make contributions to your companies 401k , for example , those contributions are subtracted from your income before the remainder of the income is taxed . Since Uncle Sam did n't get his slice of tax on your 401k money , he takes it when you make your withdrawals . In your Roth 's case , you 've already paid him , so your Roth withdrawals are not taxed . So your contributions , -LRB- up to $ 5500 , $ 6500 if you are 50 + -RRB- are made after tax -LRB- and can not be deducted on your income tax forms -RRB- , and your withdrawals tax free , as long as they meet the 5 year , or 591/2 year old rule . If you withdraw more than what you 've paid in before that time , the gains are taxable , so be careful . I hope that clears it up for you , if not , please feel free to contact me , and I 'll walk you through it . Thanks for asking !
If your health insurance policy is not a grandfathered plan put in place before the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ACA -RRB- provisions went into effect and certainly if you have enrolled in a major medical policy after January 1 , 2014 then the answer is `` Yes '' . Under the ACA law health insurance plans must treat mental health and substance abuse problems as any other illness . In addition , there are now provisions for preventive care services in relation to some mental illnesses , depression screening and behavioral assessments for example , that must be covered at no cost to the member . A policy holder should carefully examine the provisions of their own policy or call their insurance carrier 's member services department to verify what services are covered , where they are covered and what coverage provisions of your contract your needed services are subject to . For example , if you are an individual who enrolled in a Bronze level plan and youneed mental health services that are not preventive in nature but are for actual treatment then it is a virtual certainty that these services will be subject to your plan 's deductible and/or co-insurance provisions before you begin to see the insurance carrier paying for these services . In many cases this could be an amount in excess of $ 6000 before you would cease paying out-of-pocket for any services . Also , verify which mental health/behavioral health providers and facilities are in-network with your provider and determine if you have to be pre-certified to see any of these providers before you seek care in a non-emergency situation .
Health insurance paid by an employer for coverage on an employee or the employee ' s dependents is deductible as a normal business expense under IRC Section 162 . Health insurance benefits are not wages and therefore are not subject to wage taxes . For this purpose , the term `` employee '' includes an owner/employee of a C-corporation but does not include owner employees of other types of businesses . Self-employed individuals may deduct 100 % of the cost of health insurance as an `` above the line '' expense on the front page of their Form 1040 . The deduction is available to all qualifying taxpayers , regardless of whether they choose to itemize their other expenses . Direct deductions from gross income are allowed only to the extent of the amount of net self-employment income . Excess amounts , if any , may be deducted of Schedule A as listed in the `` Individuals '' section below . The term `` self-employed person '' for this purpose includes non-salaried owners of S-corporations , LLCs , partners and sole proprietors underIRC Section 162i . WEBSITELINK Except for salaried owner/employees , health insurance paid by a business on behalf of a self-employed person is not a deductible business expense . For example , if an S-corporation that pays for health insurance for its non-salaried owner/employee , this expense is not listed as a business expense on the Form 1120 but rather the deduction flows directly through the Form 1120S to the individual owner ' s Form 1040 . Health insurance for salaried owner/employees is treated the same as regular employees except that an adjustment for self-employment tax is made . Health insurance benefits provided by an employer are not taxable income underIRC section104and105 . This includes amounts paid by the employer to reimburse the employee for the cost of health insurance . Of course , the employee may not `` double-dip '' by deducting the cost of these tax-free benefits on an individual tax return . The cost of health insurance paid by individuals is tax deductible only to the extend that the cost of coverage they paid , in combination with some other specified expenses , is more than 7.5 % of adjusted gross income . For most people , this limitation effectively means that they do not get a tax deduction for the cost of health insurance paid . The cost of health insurance paid by an employer is a deductible personal expense if the amount is included as wages in Box 1 of Form W2 , but this is a relatively rare situation .
I presume you are asking about the individual mandate requirement of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- and the tax penalty associated with not having health insurance or health insurance that meets the requirements of the Affordable Care Act . The term `` levy '' is technically inaccurate as that is an assessment applied to a population in general . Persons without health insurance in 2014 will be subject to a tax penalty when they file their 2014 tax returns in 2015 . The penalty for being uninsured in 2014 will be $ 95 per adult and $ 47.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 285 per household -RRB- or 1 % of their Modified Adjusted Gross Income -LRB- MAGI -RRB- , whichever is greater . The tax penalty for being uninsured in 2015 will increase to $ 325 per adult and $ 162.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 975 per household -RRB- or 2 % of their MAGI , whichever is greater . If you persist in being uninsured in 2016 the tax penalty jumps to $ 695 per adult and $ 347.50 per child -LRB- up to $ 2085 per household -RRB- or 2.5 % of MAGI , whichever is greater . In subsequent years the tax penalty will be adjusted upward by the inflation rate . As the law is currently constructed , the tax penalties described above can only be collected by the IRS from any income tax refund that the taxpayer would have received . The IRS can not bill the taxpayer for the penalty , place a lien on their assets or criminally prosecute the taxpayer . Obviously , this means that an uninsured person 's tax penalty on paper and what their true penalty -LRB- if any -RRB- might be will be directly related to whether they are eligible for a tax refund . So , a person 's ability to structure their tax withholding during the course of the year , or in the case of self-employed persons making estimated tax payments , so that they have little or no refund or owe additional taxes when filing their tax return may largely negate or eliminate the tax penalty for being uninsured .
end question
start question
annuities
What Are Longevity Annuities ?
Assuming you mean any annuity that has the policy provision to annuitize for life no matter how long you live . Lifetime income that you cant outlive is a powerful financial tool that can be the foundation of a secure retirement . If you annuitize a non-qualified annuity for life time benefits , the basis is amortized to your life expectancy as a portion of your payment from the start of distribution called the exclusion ratio .
Longevity protection is a good definition for an immediate annuity . I have not heard that word longevity used as a description of an annuity . An annuity provides money that the annuitant can not outlive . At the same time it provides for the highest consumption . So you have high income and can not outlive your asset . That sounds like a longevity annuity to me . These are sold by licensed life insurance agents .
Retirement doesnt change the nature of many risks faced by an individual . If you operate an automobile you will want sufficient insurance to meet any anticipated loss . It is important to remember that when you experience an uncovered loss and are retired the money to cover that loss will come from your retirement savings in most situations . Be sure to carry the highest possible liability limits . Consider an umbrella policy . If you own a home you will want sufficient insurance to protect valuable assets against loss . This is also a good time to increase the limit of liability insurance because a lawsuit could ruin your retirement plans . As people age they tend to acquire inherited property . That property needs to be reviewed and insured as appropriate . There are few of us that actually outgrow our need for life insurance . Our death is going to have a financial impact on those we love . To that extent consider permanent insurance . Single premium life insurance can play a particularly helpful role in paying final expenses but also can be used to establish bequests . Many retirees carefully protect their savings so they can pass something to their heirs . It might be beneficial to establish those gifts through life insurance and thus be able to spend freely the money that remains . Life insurance is also needed if the death of one spouse will have a serious impact on the retirement income of the survivor . Sometimes it is appropriate to select a life income option on a pension plan or annuity and then purchase life insurance to make up the loss of survivor benefit . Many retirees are concerned about charities and life insurance is a wonderful way to handle those interests as well . The most ominous issue for most retirees is long term care . Studies show that these expenses are one of the top concerns among retirees . With the increase in longevity comes an increased possibility of having a long term care need . Considering long term care insurance in a retirement budget is important . Health tends to decline , not improve with age . One option available is to take advantage of the Health Savings Accounts typically offered by employers who are enrolled in their companies high deductible plans . This tax incentive allows the individuals to contribute with pre-tax dollars and enjoy the gain on investments held in the account tax-free . Employers are often linking the HSA to the retirement program which helps employees understand that they can use the account to accumulate money for their medical needs in retirement . Some people will accumulate a substantial amount . Since these funds are not subject to required minimum distributions at seventy and a half they can continue to increase in value until needed . Because Medicare doesnt provide complete medical coverage most retirees purchase a Medigap supplemental insurance policy from a private insurance company . State administrators are involved in the coverage that these policies provide and sometimes in their pricing . Another form of insurance available to seniors is longevity insurance . This is effectively a deferred income annuity which isnt means tested until age 85 . Traditional Long term care insurance should not be overlooked . While the cost is subject to a great deal of debate the alternative is to assume the risk personally . Hybrid life and annuity policies can provide long term care coverage under certain conditions . In retirement expenses continue and retirees are often called upon to select between their own needs and the wants and desires of heirs . Anything that can be done to fence off expenses can make difficult decisions easier .
Asthma is a rapidly growing disease in the USA . There is abundant evidence as to the effect of asthma on the longevity of people . Insurance companies can determine mathematically the variation that someone with asthma makes to the normal distribution of mortality . Underwriters take a subjective look at individual cases and make determinations of the effect they expect the asthma to have on the longevity of the customer . They then make an offer of insurance .
Here are some factors that should be considered when purchasing long term are insurance : Family health history , family longevity , convalescent care of parents and grandparents . If your family has a chronic history of medical problems , it could present a predisposition for you . If you have family longevity with parents or grandparents , you have a greater need for extended care based on living longer . Its fascinating to observe one familys chronic convalesces versus another familys occasional use of assisted home care . And keep in mind that seniors pay around $ 250,000 in medical bills during their retirement years , some of which are extended care expenditures .
Many life insurance providers offer individual Disability insurance . If there are life insurance brokers in your area it 's a good bet that they will be able to help you out with that . I think it 's always a good idea to buy from a provider that has proven strength and longevity and that has a local representative . And be sure to ask as many questions about the coverage as you can think of . What are the exclusions and what is the waiting period are important things to know going in .
Life annuities are generally a lifetime payout of income based on the companies net interest rate and mortality credits assigned to the policy . Life only payout can generate an income you ca n't outlive . This is important because the number one risk in retirement is human longevity . So even if you live past age 100 , your income continues .
In retirement , human longevity is a huge risk . The longer we live , the odds become higher that we will need assisted or living and/or nursing home confinement . The costs for care are ever increasing , so it 's important to protect your retirement income from the economic eroding affects of long term care costs .
The # 1 risk to retirement is human longevity . Nothing impacts retirement income like extended mortality risk . And the second consideration is defending retirement income from assisted living or nursing home care costs that can erode the income and other assets . Long term care insurance can covers those costs . It 's part of defensive planning for retirement .
The # 1 risk in retirement is human longevity . Living longer will impact fixed income retirement payouts pressured by ever increasing life expectancy . But the real impact on retirement may very well be the cost of assisted living and/or nursing home confinement , that can be expense in the later days of a senior .
The # 1 risk in retirement is human longevity . Living longer can impact the cash flow of seniors with unexpected costs like long term care . Whether it 's at home assisted living or nursing home confinement , long term care can mitigate the cost of elder care via indemnification or reimbursement coverage .
The # 1 risk to retirement is longevity risk . That risk impacts retirement income and can increase the probability of using long term care for assisted living and/or nursing home confinement . An average 60 year old male non smoker may pay $ 300 a month for $ 7,000 a month for five years .
Other than the harmful effects it might have on your body and the decreased longevity , nothing will happen . Your life insurance policy is based on declarations that you made on a certain date . When things change after the issue date of the policy , the terms and conditions of the policy can not be altered . The same would be true of hazardous hobbies or occupations .
A whole life policy accumulates cash value in order to maintain a face amount at a level premium . There is a point in the design of every whole life policy where the cash value equals the face amount . At that point the policy endows or matures . With increasing longevity companies are leaning to every later dates for maturity .
Long term care is a morbidity insurance product to help mitigate the cost of assisted living and/or nursing home confinement . The # 1 retirement risk is human longevity , that can place stress of fixed incomes for seniors . Long term care insurance can help with these expenses that generally occur later in life .
The # 1 risk to retirement is human l ; longevity . Living longer means your retirement money has to last longer . Most seniors are on a fixed income , so any additional expenses can have a significant impact . Long term care insurance can mitigate the cost of assisted living and/or nursing home confinement .
Long term care insurance is a morbidity product offered by insurance companies to pay for expenses incurred from assisted living and nursing home care . Long term care insurance helps mitigate the cost of extended elder care during retirement . With longevity risk ever increasing , long term care insurance is a must in retirement planning .
Because life insurance is all about statistics companies can provide life insurance for individuals in a wide range of health . There are some who can not obtain coverage because their longevity is in immediate risk , however , many who consider themselves uninsurable actually can obtain coverage . When life expectancy is not very long , the premium for the coverage is going to be quite high .
Most advisers begin addressing long term care insurance with their clients and prospects around age 50 . But it seems that many seniors purchase it in their early 60s . The # 1 risk in retirement is human longevity . Living longer impacts retirement funds and the increased probability of needing assisted living and/or nursing home care .
Many seniors are under the impression that long term care is not affordable , even though most seniors believe that they will need , at minimum , assisted living at home . With human longevity rewriting retirement modeling , long term care insurance is a must for practical defensive planning in your golden years .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Home Insurance Cover Plumbing ?
If the damage is the result of neglect there isnt any coverage . If the damage is caused by a backup of water through the sewer system , damage is excluded unless that coverage is purchased as an option . If the cause is freezing the policy will cover not damages ifthe property is unoccupied . Claims involving continuous and repeated seepage or leakage are also excluded by the policy . Damage caused by freezing is also excluded .
Water damage that is caused by a sudden failure of the system such as occurs if pipes freeze or if the material or a joint fails , will generally be covered . Things that can be considered a failure to perform routine maintenance , however , may not be so be sure to check with your Insurance Professional .
Homeowners Insurance usually covers water damage except as excluded on a policy ! Water Damage due to Flood Waters from outside are not covered and also the Backup of Sewers/Drains may be limited or excluded on a home insurance policy unless endorsed otherwise . If water damage is caused as a result of a leaking roof or broken interior plumbing , the damage would usually be covered . Please note : plumbing is not covered by the home insurance policy since plumbing is expected to be maintained in good condition at all times by the homeowner . A home warranty policy may be separately purchased by the homeowner for maintenance repairs including plumbing . For further details on coverage , please consult your policy booklet and/or contact a licensed representative to assist reading the policy to answer your question in detail .
Most Home Insurance policies will only cover a vacant or unoccupied home for a short time -LRB- 60 or 90 days -RRB- before they impose coverage limitations . I have seen policies with much higher deductible for `` vacant '' homes . Most wo n't cover burst plumbing or theft/vandalism if the house is ruled vacant at the time of a claim . If you have a vacation home , most seasonal home policies understand that the house will be unoccupied for large periods of time , and address that in their coverage terms . There are vacant home policies that are designed for unoccupied homes . If your home is for sale , or has been unoccupied for a long periodic time I suggest you talk to an insurance agent about getting a vacant home policy . Foremost Insurance and Vacant Express are two companies that specialize in vacant home coverage .
Plumbing that fails is not covered under your homeowners insurance policy , only the damage caused by your failed plumbing if the dwelling is damaged . For example a pipe under the sink breaks . The pipe itself is not covered but the water damage is covered . Of course if the house burns down the plumbing is covered .
As David mentioned above , standard `` wear and tear '' of plumbing is not covered under homeowner 's insurance ; neither is maintenance of plumbing . However , in the case of a sudden rupture or burst pipe , your homeowner 's policy might cover the resulting water damage , subject to your deductible , although the plumber 's fees to repair the damaged plumbing would most likely not be covered .
Generally no , a homeowners policy will not cover damage to underground plumbing . For the most part , other than wear and tear -LRB- which is not a covered peril in such a policy -RRB- earth movement of some sort might be about the only cause of damage to such systems . Earth movement is an excluded cause of loss in a standard Homewners policy which can , however , be endorsed onto your policy . Talk to your Insurance Professional about this and all of the terms and conditions of your particular policy . That having been said , if the underground plumbing is damaged by an outside force , for example , a dump truck that drives over yoiur property , compressing the soil ad thus damaging the plumbing system , this should be covered by the contractor 's General Liability or Commercial Vehicle insurance .
Usually when asked about plumbing and homeownersinsurancethe question is in reference to leaking or breaking . In this case no , the homeowners insurance does not cover plumbing . However , thedamagethe sudden burst or rupture of a pipe sending water all over the house would be covered if the dwelling suffered water damage . But only the dwelling , not the pipe . If a pipe has been slow leaking over a long period of time damaging the dwelling then most likely the damage may not be covered since the incident is not sudden and accidental .
A homeowners policy will cover the home and contents in the even of damage due to wind , fire , hail , smoke , etc. . It does not cover wear and tear and breakdown of your appliances . Nor does it cover plumbing and/or electrical wiring . Water damage is covered at an additional cost depending on what type of policy you have . Its always best to consult your agent on the specifics of your policy .
Mold is in every home . Building materials provide the food necessary for mold to grow . Moisture is the ingredient necessary for mold to become a problem . Moisture , most commonly comes from leaking plumbing . Leaky plumbing is excluded in most homeowners policies . If the mold is the result of a sudden discharge from a pipe in the home , coverage might be available ; however , remediation normally eliminates that from happening .
No it is not going to cover underground plumbing . It would be very hard for underground plumbing to be damaged by a covered peril . If you feel there is an unusual situation that may possibly be covered then examine your policy or call you agent . He can help you determinewhetherit is covered or not .
If plumbing fails suddenly the damage it creates is covered . The plumbing repair isnt covered but the damage to the building and personal property will be covered . Wear and tear on a part of the house is generally not covered . It is the responsibility of the homeowner to do everything to stop further damage the moment a leak is discovered . This includes turning off the water , and with a water damage expert , discovering the source of the water .
Your homeowners policy covers damages to your residence from either a list of named perils or is an all-risk policy covering all risks except those that are excluded . Once plumbing is underground the possibility of suffering damage by an insured peril is remote . Ground movement and water damage would be the two most likely causes of loss and they are excluded from the normal homeowners policy . Fair wear and tear is never covered . If the house burns and the plumbing is destroyed above ground , that would be covered .
Different providers offer solutions for insuring your home and managing the cost of that protection . There are several things that you should be able to consider whenlooking for Home insurance and it is best to consult your insurance professional . Generally speaking , you may find that it is less costly to insure a newer home vs an older one . Choosing a $ 1000 deductible rather than a $ 500 or $ 250 , will reduce your premium . Install a central monitored security and fire system and that may save you about 10 % . Always ask about bundling your Home , Auto and Life insurance plans because these bundling plans can really save you money . Check to see if your carrier offers discounts for installing a new roof or upgrading your plumbing , electrical or HVAC systems . Finally , maintain your home . Fixing small problems as they show themselves will usually keep repair costs down . Maintaining your home andpropertyis also the best way to protect it from storm damage .
Plumbing is not covered by homeowners insurance . The damage that is caused by water through and accidental circumstance is covered . Ebbing and Flowing water that comes from the outside into the house is not covered by homeowners so you need a flood policy to remedy damage . On the plumbing part of the question think of it this way if an insurance company can not see the pipes how can they insure it from the beginning . They have no idea what lies beneath and are not going to take on that risk .
Your water heater is part of your home , just like th rest of your plumbing system , so yes , it would be covered . What it is covered for depends on what type of coverage you have purchased . For example home insurance does n't pay for mechanical failure , so if it just quits working you do n't have a claim . If your water heater bursts , you may have coverage for water damage coming out of the water heater if you havea `` Special Form '' policy . If the house burns up and your water heater goes along with it , your insurance should pay for a home with a water heater . So you see it depends a lot . Email me with specifics at WEBSITELINK
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
If you find your home infested with bed bugs , will your renters insurance policy cover the clean-up and debugging expense ? In most cases , the answer is unfortunately no . The majority of renters insurance policies will cover the following general perils : - Fire damage - Damage as a result of a natural disaster ; windstorms , hail , lightening -LRB- flood damage is often not covered by most policies -RRB- - Smoke damage resulting from fire within the unit or from nearby units - Vandalism - Burglary/Theft - Damage caused by a fallen roof ; often caused by water , snow and/or ice build up - Damage from appliances ; water heaters , steam heaters , air conditioners - Fallen objects - i.e. trees , power lines - Freezing of plumbing , heating or air conditioning pipes But , most renters policies currently exclude vermin infestation , which encompasses bed bugs , despite the recent rise in reported incidents nationwide . Bed bugs can become expensive guests , causing a damage and costly clean up -LRB- debugging , steam cleaning and the cost of relocation during the clean-up -RRB- . Plus , they spread to other homes around the infested area quickly through animal and human transfer . Until renters policies begin to cover bed bug infestations , the best plans of attack are prevention and to build a rainy day fund for general home emergencies .
In order to obtain a home insurance quote , you will need to contact a provider and answer questions for the carrier to assess the risk and thus quote the risk based on your specific factors . A few of the risk factors that assess the premium are : the geographic area of the home to be insured , the home 's characteristics -LRB- size & year built -RRB- , the type of roof , type of plumbing , recent updates , prior claims , amount of Personal Liability insurance requested , deductible requested and any additional endorsements that you would like to add -LRB- i.e. jewelry , personal injury , extended liability to other dwelling etc. . . -RRB- . The price of home insurance differs in each and every zip code in the country based on actuarial figures ; also all insurance carriers have a different method of assessing risk thus producing a different premium for the same policy .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Why Is Term Life Insurance Often The Best Value ?
I am not sure that anyone could say that term life insurance is often the best value without knowing a person 's exact situation . Term life insurance is the most affordable compared to permanent or cash value insurance , but it may not be the best value . If you purchase a 20 year term policy at age 30 and have a heart condition at age 48 and lose insurability , it will be very difficult to obtain any type of life insurance after age 50 when the term expires . There are many arguments to be made with the different types of life insurance plans . The one that is best for your unique situation and laid out by a caring knowledgeable advisor is the best value for you specifically .
Term insurance is often the best value in a specific set of circumstances . These are : You need life insurance for a limited amount of time ; You want to pay as little as possible for that coverage ; You have no need for the advantages of accumulating cash inside life insurance . Lets suppose you have a personal loan such as a mortgage , or a bank loan for your business . You need life insurance to cover those liabilities . You have other policies in force to take care of your family and your estate . So , you pick up a term policy to cover that specific need . Maybe you unfortunately are getting divorced , and the decree requires a policy for a set amount of years . Or , you start a business with a partner , and you need to fund your buy-sell agreement up to a certain age . So , you pick up a term policy . Lets suppose you have a disciplined savings program and are accumulating wealth in a number of vehicles . You have many investments , and they range from aggressive to conservative . No real need to use life insurance to grow cash . But you do need coverage . So , you pick up a term policy . In these cases , permanent , cash value insurance might be overkill . You dont have to spend extra money in premium for a long-term guarantee you dont want , and for cash you dont need . Just make sure you know what youre doing , because if it ends up that you do want life insurance after the term policy renews , all bets could be off . The price could be high , and you also run the risk of not being insurable . Bear that in mind .
Why can ? A simple question , but yet , so complex ! Why can someone do this or why can someone do that ? I have often pondered for hours to come up with the answer . And I believe , after years of thought-provoking consultation with friends and relatives ... I have the answer to the question `` Why can ? '' The answer ? Why not ?
Short answer : About 8 % Long answer : It 's hard to say exactly how many people own some type of policy that covers paying the costs of long term care - should one qualify for it - because there are many types of insurance policies that are not just `` stand-alone '' long-term care policies , but plans of insurance that include being able to use a percentage of other plan benefits for paying long-term care costs :1 . Stand-alone long-term care insurance covers only long-term care costs . It has no cash value . When a policy owner dies , coverage either lapses or stops paying benefits . It is not transferable . It can not be bought or sold on a secondary market . This type of long-term care insurance is sometimes referred to as `` traditional '' long-term care insurance , as well . It is the type of coverage that is most often associated with the `` percentage of Americans that own their own long-term care insurance '' .2 . Hybrid long-term care contracts consist of having long-term coverage and a life insurance policy that guarantees to at least return the full premium paid into the policy to the insured 's designated beneficiary . Usually , these are single-premium contracts , but some have options to also pay over a specified period of time , such as 5 - or 10-years .3 . Linked life + long-term care policies are basically a traditional permanent life insurance contract -LRB- Whole Life or Universal Life , including the Variable or Indexed type -RRB- . If a person qualifies for long-term care and they have the long-term care rider on their life policy , they may apply to the insurance company to advance or accelerate the face value of the policy -LRB- death benefit -RRB- to pay for the costs of care . There are various limitations on how much can be advanced at a time . If the face value of the life contract is completely advanced for long-term care , there is usually a residual death benefit of $ 5,000 - $ 10,000.4 . The latest addition to life insurance product lines are policies offering `` living benefits '' , one of which is very similar to the linked-life policy . In fact , the only difference is that a medical professional has to state in writing that the insured is not likely to recover from the condition that qualifies for long-term care benefits . -LRB- True long-term care insurance does not require that . -RRB- This type of living benefit is most often referred to as `` chronic care '' or `` extended care '' . Annuities may also have special considerations for paying out portions of the account value for long-term care costs.The point is , people who own life insurance or annuity contracts with long-term care accommodations are not typically included in with the 8 % that own traditional long-term care . So , the real percentage of those that have made some type of insurance purchase to offset long-term care costs is greater than 8 % . I doubt , however , that the total percentage of Americans that own any of the above-described types of policies would exceed 20 % at this time .
I am not sure that anyone could say that term life insurance is often the best value without knowing a person 's exact situation . Term life insurance is the most affordable compared to permanent or cash value insurance , but it may not be the best value . If you purchase a 20 year term policy at age 30 and have a heart condition at age 48 and lose insurability , it will be very difficult to obtain any type of life insurance after age 50 when the term expires . There are many arguments to be made with the different types of life insurance plans . The one that is best for your unique situation and laid out by a caring knowledgeable advisor is the best value for you specifically .
When talking about cash value in life insurance policies it is important to differentiate between the policy value and the surrender value . For example , in a universal life insurance policy the policy value -LRB- or fund value -RRB- would be the accumulated cash value which is earning interest . However , almost all universal life insurance policies have a decreasing surrender charge schedule . This means that if you were to surrender the policy in the early years the surrender charge could reduce most -LRB- or all -RRB- of the value you receive . The value you would receive is called the net surrender value , because it is net of all charges . At some point , say 10 or 20 years down the road , the surrender charges will go away and the policy value will equal the net surrender value . This is part of the reason why cash value life insurance should always be looked at as a long term proposition .
Most Life Insurance sold in the US is term insurance either through an employer , or group or directly to an individual . The concept is that you will be able to buy a certain level of coverage guaranteed at a certain price during some specified time period . So , it would be common to sell someone term life for a term of 10 years , 15 years or 20 years . The policy usually allows this purchase during the `` term '' without having to provide any documentation of insurability . Keep in mind a couple truisms . life Insurance is virtually always more expensive in the future then it is toady . Why ? You grow older . Secondly , a significant amount of Term insurance , never has an actual payout of benefits . Why ? The person insured lives past the end of the term . So while you may need Term insurance for the short term , take a look at whole life or variations of it that allows cash value accumulations .
The most expensive mistake a homeowner can make is to be underinsured . Regardless of what the premiums were , a single high value loss that exceeds the limits of the policy can make those saving immaterial . Setting adequate limits is absolutely crucial . The person that can help set appropriate limits is a reliable insurance agent . This is a far greater problem than many think . The primary place where this shows up is having inadequate liability limits . Your homeowners policy provides liability coverage for personal injury and property damage law suits . The company pays all costs for a lawsuit up to the limits of the policy . After that the homeowner is facing the lawsuit alone . Most companies do not offer adequate liability limits and most policyholders select limits that are lower than the maximum offered by the company . An umbrella policy is necessary for most homeowners . The second area that is often underinsured is valuable collections . The homeowners policy has internal limits for recovery on certain items . Most homeowner dont know that their inherited sterling silver is woefully underinsured . They dont understand that those guns in the cabinet could be destroyed and they would only get a fraction of their value . The same is true of jewelry , a coin collection , and many other items . This is all detailed inside the policy , but few homeowners ever read their policy . Some people continue to underinsure their structure . While not as common it is an increasing phenomenon . A homeowner will improve the home and never inform the company or agent . In the event of a loss the amount of coverage might not return the home to its updated glory . This coverage is really inexpensive , however a loss can be paralyzing . Some homeowners have multiple homes . The second homes are often in hazardous areas , such as lakefront , beach front and mountain property . The cost of replacing one of these homes can exceed the insured value because of inflated reconstruction costs . If a forest fire sweeps through some summer cottages , there will be a great demand for contractors to do the work and there will also be bidding for materials . It can get ugly . So adequate insurance is the first step , the second step is to focus on the policy itself . Homeowners can often save significant money by increasing the deductibles on their policies . The deductible should be set at the amount of loss that could be absorbed without serious disruption to the family finances . That is often more than the deductible in the policy . Companies traditionally offer discounts if coverages are packaged . Some companies cover a wide range of policies and by bringing those to a single carrier premium savings can often be realized . This is particularly true if you own another residence that you lease to someone else . Often extending liability coverage from you homeowners policy will save you money . Companies often give discounts for loss prevention . The most common is the central station monitored alarm systems . While companies are rarely as generous as the alarm sales people indicate , there are savings to be had by simply providing a certificate of installation . Sometimes the homeowners policy will be modified if substantial rehabilitation is done to the home . You would need to talk to your agent about this . You could also discuss the jewelry insurance if the jewelry is most often located in a safe deposit at the bank .
That is a great question ! There are two basic types of life insurance , one that ends , and one that does n't . The one that ends is called `` term '' insurance . This type of policy is advertised often on TV and in mail by large Senior Citizen friendly companies , and unless you realize that it ends when you turn 80 , can be in for a big , unpleasant surprise . The term policy as a clearly stated end date , has no value if it does n't pay out , and becomes very expensive very quickly if renewed . `` Whole life '' insurance is exactly that - insurance for your whole life . It is more expensive than term life , because as long as you make your payments , it 's going to pay out -LRB- most term policies never do , that 's why they are so cheap -RRB- . If you would like to discuss which one might be best for you , contact me , and I 'll make time for you . Thanks for asking !
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , you can and in general terms life insurance is a financial risk management product that the earlier in life one purchases it the lower the cost will be . Without getting too technical there are essentially two types of life insurance ; term life insurance and permanent life insurance -LRB- often referred to as whole or universal types of permanent life insurance -RRB- . Term life insurance will be the least expensive and as it 's name implies it covers you for a fixed term or period of time -LRB- usually 10 , 20 or 30 years -RRB- . Whole life insurance policies are generally designed to cover you throughout life and until death . Whole life insurance policies are more expensive but they often offer features such a cash build up , the ability to be paid up in full over a certain period of time but continue in force until the policy holder 's death . Most people purchase a mix of these two types of policies to cover their differing needs throughout different stages of their lives . For example , you will probably have a need for more life insurance during your working years when you are getting married , having children , have a mortgage and other financial obligations that you want to protect your survivor 's from if you were to pass away during that stage of life . Having a large amount of financial protection with lower cost term insurance for these years is an approach used by many people . They then often compliment the term policy with a lesser amount of permanent life insurance to make sure that if the pass away in old age that their funeral expenses and any outstanding debts are taken care of and that they perhaps leave an inheiritance to their spouse , children and/or grandchildren .
No , Term life insurance does not usually have a cash surrender value . Term insurance buys pure protection rather than building up a cash value , and that is why the costs of Term life insurance is usually lower than policies that have cash value . Return of Premium -LRB- ROP -RRB- Term is one type of Term that could have a cash surrender value if you kept the policy long enough .
There are several different reasons home insurance rates increase . Most carriers would probably tell you that at least a portion of their increases are linked to weather/natural disaster related claims increases over the past few years . I often hear from clients in Wisconsin -LRB- our location -RRB- thinking they should not have to pay more for insurance due to the carrier having more lossesfrom fires out west , or hurricanes on the coast.Clients say they did not have a claim so why should they pay more?This debate will rage on but I doubt much will change . Insurance carriers are a business and when they pay out more in claims , due to bad weather or what have you , they have to make up for the difference ; increasing premiums . They spread risk around to remain competetive , trying to balance out higher risk states/locationswith lower risk states/locations . Average premiums on a state to state level often reflect this -LRB- for example , Florida is often ranked number one for premium cost primarily due to the high risk of weather related claims -RRB- . Another common reason carriers provide for increasing prmeiumsis to keep pace with inflation , many policies offer inflation guard to keep pace with estimated values . What is the take away here ? Home insurance is WORTH IT ! Protect your home and investment , likely your most expensive one ! Talk to an independent agent today !
A whole life insurance policy is an extremely flexible product that can meet many needs in retirement . The most obvious need is death . It is obvious that retirement always ends in death . Death is not inexpensive . The proceeds of a whole life insurance policy can pay off some or all of those expenses . After a certain age term policies can not be written at any price . I recently had a client who forgot that there was a life policy on her husband . She was paying his funeral expenses on an installment plan . I discovered the policy and brought it to her attention . She was delighted . Another use of a whole life policy is to transfer property to heirs . Often a person will want to leave money to children , grandchildren or a favorite charity . They will then try to conserve their retirement assets so that money will be available when the die . Unfortunately they often rob themselves of lifes simple pleasures in their drive to provide that inheritance . A life insurance policy can do that at the beginning of retirement leaving the person the balance of assets to spend as they wish . Some people have estates that are subject to estate tax . The problem with estate tax is that if there isnt cash to pay the taxes , assets are often sold at below market value to pay the tax . Having cash can make the difference of keeping the family business going , maintaining the family farm or closing them up for taxes . Since that can happen at any time , a whole life policy is particularly flexible in that regard . Whole life insurance is often used when a person wants to leave a specific valuable asset to one child but wants to treat all the children in the same manner . The heirs that are not going to get that valuable asset could receive equivalent proceeds from a whole life policy and everyone would be happy . A whole life policy is often used to purchase the interest of another party in a business . In this case the surviving partners dont particularly want to share everything with a widow who may not be acquainted with the business . A whole life policy can provide the cash to take care of that situation by giving the survivors the funds they need to purchase the widows interests . Sometimes whole life insurance is used to fund day to day living expenses in retirement . I just finished a comparison that showed that a whole life policy performed as well as a fixed annuity in accumulating money for retirement and that it did that with the promise to pay the full benefit should the person die before retiring . The whole life policy has non-forfeiture provisions which can pay a lifetime stream of income if desired or the policy would also give the person the flexibility to use the policy in other ways depending upon future , unforeseen events . This may sound strange but I often get requests for whole life insurance from older individuals . They seem to appreciate the value of lasting protection at a fixed price .
That is a great question ! There is a reason why term life policies are so cheap , and a reason why you should know exactly what these policies are best designed to do . There is no cash value in a term life policy , as your premium is designed to only cover the cost of the insurance . The policy reaches its term and ends , and you walk away , or pay dearly to renew . This can be a real issue when you learn that the policies advertised so heavily by companies like AARP and AAA are term policies that end when the policy holder turns 80 . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
Generally , you want to have some form of coverage if you have a need for it . If you have a term insurance policy , you will generally drop it when the initial premium guarantee period expires - at this point , the policy would become annually renewable and the premium will increase each year by a substantial amount -LRB- based on age -RRB- . People will generally replace an expiring term insurance policy with a new term policy or a permanent policy . If you have a permanent policy , you 're generally keeping it for life - that 's why you bought a PERMANENT policy . However , there are many situations why people `` drop '' these policies . A common one is because they may be able to secure a lower premium , better guarantees , and/or better cash value build-up . When people change from one permanent policy to another , they may do a 1035 exchange/rollover to reduce the premiums they 're paying each month -LRB- this is done by taking the cash value from the old policy and using it towards the first year 's premium on the new policy . A lot of people tend to drop their coverage because they ca n't afford the premiums . Many programs allow you to reduce the face amount of the policy to reduce the premiums - so you do n't necessarily need to drop your coverage because you ca n't afford the original rates . Why would you do this rather than just drop the policy altogether ? - your program 's existing risk class and your current medical insurability . You may also consider converting your term program to a permanent policy as well . I highly recommend consulting with your agent before dropping your coverage to make sure it 's the right move for you . There may be alternative courses of actions you have n't thought of that are available to you that may play out better for you in the long run .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Why is whole life a bad investment ? Well , it could be the people that tell you that whole life is a bad investment do n't sell whole life and want you to purchase what they have for you to buy . Or quite often whole life is compared to term with a equity -LRB- stock -RRB- fund . The problem with this as an accurate comparison is that it does n't take risk into account . Whole life is a dull boring consistent product that does what it says it will over time . A stock market equity -LRB- mutual fund or whatever -RRB- is a different sort of risk . It can rise and fall and even disappear . While whole life policies tend to be invested in more secure long term investments which because they 're safe and long term , provide a lower , but consistent rate of return . And the nice thing about Whole life is the cash values ca n't go backwards .
Gap insurance is a coverage that is offered either on your auto policy or through the auto finance company as an option -LRB- or requirement -RRB- on your loan . Basically , what it does is provide you a clean slate if you total a car with a loan on it . Lets look at an example : Erica buys a 2009 Volkswagon Jetta from a used car shop for $ 14,000 . The used car value could be 12,500 depending on what form you use -LRB- blackbook value , NADA , Kelly Bluebook value , etc. -RRB- The form doesnt matter here other than answering the question of is this car worth less than the loan I have on it ? Erica is required to have other-than-collision coverage -LRB- often called comprehensive coverage , which is a misnomer -RRB- and collision coverage as a stipulation for the loan she is getting with the bank or finance company . That coverage states that it will repair her car for specific reasons in the policy OR pay her the actual cash value of the car if it costs less than the repairs it would take to make the car drivable . Often a state variation will come here saying a car can not be repaired if the expenses are 70 % or more of the value of the car - the insurance company needs to pay the policyholder the actual cash value of the car instead . If you look closely at your auto policy , you also have a coverage to protect yourself from liability caused by you damaging the property of others . This is often referred to as property damage liability or the third number in your limits -LRB- such as 100/300/100 limits -RRB- . It states that it will repair the damage caused by your actions that you are held responsible for OR pay the actual cash value of that item if less than the cost of repairs . This is important , so remember it . So what does this mean for Erica , knowing this information ? Lets say Erica has had her Volkswagon Jetta for 3 years and diligently made payments on her car without missing a payment date . The loan is now $ 9,000 after interest . The value of the car has depreciated down to $ 7600 because of the age , mileage , and usage of the car . Technically , Erica is paying $ 1400 more on the car than what it is worth -LRB- taking interest out of the equation to make it easier . -RRB- Lets say at this 3 year mark , Erica gets into an accident and the car is beyond repair . It doesnt matter if she causes the accident or if someone else was at fault , because both property damage -LRB- what the other party uses to fix Ericas car if they caused the accident -RRB- and collision coverage -LRB- the coverage used to fix Ericas car if she caused the accident -RRB- use actual cash value to determine how much repairs will be made and how much money they will pay Erica . Both coverages will give Erica $ 7600 for her car . However , since Erica has a lien on the car because she is financing it , that money actually goes to the FINANCE COMPANY and Erica wont see a penny of it . The finance company will apply that $ 7600 to her loan , meaning there is a $ 1400 balance left she is responsible for . The bank isnt a charity so they will still tell Erica she has to pay it because it is still in her contract and the bank lost $ 1400 on a car that no longer exists . Erica still has to pay $ 1400 on a car she doesnt even have , and still has to buy a new car . Thats a bad place to be in life , wouldnt you say ? Even worse , Erica might still have to make payments even if the accident wasnt her fault ! She gets all of the blame of the finance company but caused none of the problems ! If Erica had gap insurance , it would kick in at this point and relive Erica of the extra $ 1400 she would be responsible for . If Erica was ahead of her loan and the cash value of the car was more than the loan , she would get any money paid above the loan amount -LRB- thus satisfying her finance company as well -RRB- and the gap insurance would not take effect . Either way , Erica isnt paying money any more on her car that is non-functional . Here are some common stipulations found in gap insurance - check with your loan company to see if they apply to you : Gap insurance is there to pay for the loan on the car and THATS IT ! If you increase the loan to pay for any extras you are typically not going to get that part of the loan covered and will still have to pay . This includes things like the extended warranty , credit life insurance in case you die before the loan is paid off , and things like that . It might even say the gap insurance isnt paid for either and you will have to pay for that . Its definitely worth looking into . Gap insurance also says that it wont take effect if you are behind on your payments on a certain amount , pay more because the car is worth less from overuse or modifications , and wont cover intentional damage to the car . Basically , its not there to handle your loan if you are financially strapped and can not handle the payments anymore and want to get rid of the car . Another option in place of gap insurance is to get the repair/replacement coverage for your auto policy . This says that instead of getting the cash value of a car beyond repair , you get a replacement car instead -LRB- even if it costs more than the value of the car . -RRB- You would still have the loan but youd have a car as well . This coverage might not be available and it often is only available for cars less than 1-5 years old and only if you are the original owner . Talk to your agent to see if you qualify . Gap coverage is an excellent coverage to get , and is worth the investment . Used cars typically drop in value faster than the loan does from payments , and you dont want to be stuck paying on a car you dont even have anymore .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Can I Get Life Insurance On My Parents ?
I would assume by the nature of your question , you are an adult and your parents are aging . If you were young and dependent upon their care and income , the answer would be most definitely , they should both purchase life insurance to protect you from a financial disaster . You can purchase lower face amounts of life insurance on your parents without a large burden of insurable interest . Typically this is done for final expense or cleaning up some debt at their passing . Keep in mind even though you are allowed to own the policy , pay the premiums and be their beneficiary , the parents will be the insureds . All insureds must sign the application with full knowledge of what they are purchasing . The underwriter will want your parents health history , life style , age , etc. . Depending on the age and face amount , it is possible they will need a paramed exam for blood , urine , EKG , etc. . Just be sure they are informed of your decision before starting the process .
To get life insurance on your parents , the first step would be to gather their health information . Ask them for their medications , dates of diagnoses , treatment dates , whether they use -LRB- d -RRB- tobacco and when , and their weight now and a year ago . Often adult children think they know all these details about their parents , but it never hurts to ask . Being declined for an overlooked health reason is hard on both parents and children , and can be avoided with thorough fact finding ahead of time . Once you have this information , you can shop agencies that carry senior policies and/or final expense policies to get their best price . Some of these policies will simply require your parents to sign the application ; some will require a phone interview ; and some will require an exam . If you do not know what your parent is willing to go along with ahead of time , gather quotes for a couple different types of policies to present to them . If you are applying for a large face amount , the life insurance company will require that you have a financial interest in your parents ' lives , such as you living in their house or they living in yours . Smaller face amounts for final expense purposes will not usually have that requirement .
You can apply for life insurance insuring each parent and be the policy owner and beneficiary.They would have to be insurable.The insured parent would have to consent to the coverage and the release of medical information with their signature . While you might wish to apply for one policy on each parent , policies are available insuring both on one policy that pays at the death of the second to die , which may be a better fit for your needs and be more cost effective than two policies .
It may not be a good idea to get more life insurance after getting a new mortgage . You may have enough already . Heres how you could find out . Ask yourself the following : Do I have enough coverage so that my spouse can pay off the mortgage if I pass away ? What if I take out a second mortgage ? Do I have enough coverage for that as well ? What if I feel I have enough coverage for both the mortgage and my dependents - but then have another kid ? Then I would need more of the benefit to replace my income , and so would have less to cover the bank debt . How about any other family obligations ? Are my parents financially secure ? Any chance one or both would become dependent on me ? If so , that would create a demand for more coverage . Any business obligations ? Is my partnership agreement funded ? The services of my key people indemnified ? Bank debt insured ? Estate preservation ? Charitable gifts ? Can you see where I am headed with all these questions ? If you have completed a financial needs analysis , covering both current and future needs for life insurance , then you could be pretty sure whether or not you have enough coverage . If you are like most other people , you dont . You will probably end up buying another policy :-RRB- .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
As someone who has owned a life insurance policy since age 19 let me express it this way . You need life insurance if there is somebody in your life who will have to pick up your mess and settle your affairs . At 19 , the purchase of life insurance made perfect sense to me as I had a mom and a dad and if something happened to me , It would fall upon them to take care of my loose ends , arrange my service and maybe need some time off . This was long before I entered the insurance world as an agent . It just seemed to me , if I had died , it made sense to help my parents with the cost of dealing with my death . I figured my death was bad enough for them to deal with , my bills , my apartment and my service would just be piling on to a bad situation . So this is how I look at this situation `` does everybody need life insurance ? '' No , they do n't , but I feel sad for the person who has no need for coverage as it means there 's nobody that matters in their life enough to protect from their passing from it .
The best place to start in purchasing life insurance for a parent is to discuss the idea with them . They will , at a minimum , need to sign the application , so you can not do it without their knowledge . If they apply for a small , simplified issue policy , they will probably need to do a phone interview with the insurance company . If applying for a larger policy , they will need to take a life insurance exam that my include an EKG and questions to test their cognitive function . If they are not willing to participate in the application process in any way , they can get guaranteed issue life insurance -LRB- but will still need to sign the application -RRB- . In this first conversation , you can get an idea of what type of policy to look for by asking them how involved they want to get in the application process . At this time , you should also get a list of their medications and current and past health conditions . Most adult children are unaware of their parents ' complete health history . If your parent does not want to share that with you , they should contact an agent themselves , for their quote . You can find the most competitive rates for your parent at agencies that sell a selection of products . If the policy is going to be under $ 50,000 , there are agencies that specialize in those . The agency may call that type of policy Senior Life , as our agency does . Or they may call it Burial Insurance , Funeral Insurance , or Final Expense Insurance . If you are looking for a larger face amount , contact an agency that is experienced in Senior Life Insurance . If your parent has very serious health issues , Guaranteed Issue may be the way to go . Most companies will allow a child to pay for a policy for their parent . Whether or not you can own the policy will depend on a variety of factors . If you approach the purchase with the preparation explained above , it can be a very easy process and leave your parent feeling fulfilled , rather than frustrated .
Yes , a child can get life insurance for a parent . The parent must sign the application and do the exam , if an exam is required . If there is no exam required , the application process often involves a phone interview , and the parent must be able to answer the interview questions on their own . If you support your parent in any way , you can get a policy to help reimburse you after your parent passes . If you do not financially support your parent , you are still eligible to get your parent a small final expense policy . Contact an online final expense life insurance agency to get prices and types of policies available . It is a great thing you are doing ; all the best to you and your parent .
The answer to your question has many parts to the final answer . Let 's assume I just got married and my phone has been ringing incessantly with insurance agents pedaling their life insurance policies . My wife and I know it just makes good sense to have life insurance-my policy covering her and vice versa . The question is given my occupation and I do not want her to work how do I plan `` how much '' life insurance ? My employer can provide $ 50,000 for me and I am not taxed as long as I stay at or below $ 50,000 . So from a cost standpoint that $ 50,000 is a given . I hope to have two children to keep my wife happy and raising kids . We know it takes a huge amount to just raise the kids much less educate them . We also know if I am smart at some point in my life I will be smart to have saved enough money to get out of the life insurance market and have savings to pay any funeral costs that may arise . So on today 's date I know my `` insurance needs '' is at the highest point it will ever be assuming the two children are born and then we can avoid the `` steamy ` Saturday and be careless and now the third is here . So if I assume the first child will be born in two years that means in year 20 I have to have `` college expense '' funds '' . Is it a better investment to use life insurance or it better to open a mutual fund aggressive growth and invest a $ 100 pewr month for the next 20 years ? Let 's assume the second child in born in our fourth year of marriage . Now the same decision outlined above is with me again . What is often overlooked is the assumption is I will remain healthy and my income will increase each year . What happens if I become ill and diabled for two years ? What disablity insurance plans do I have ? Do they cover my `` own occupation '' or if I can flip hamburgers I am not considered disabled . In order to make an informed decisions you have to consider all the options . Is it best for me to take a Gerber Life insurance policy on each child for $ 20,000 , which then doubles , at their age 18 ? If I am confident that I can save sufficiently for the next 30 years I may decide to take a $ 1,000,000 30 year term policy but if I am not confident of my ability to save then I am sure going to use the `` dollar cost averging '' advantages of having a `` cash value '' policy and a mutual fund in the aggressive growth and invest $ 100 per month . I ho ; pe this helps you to see the complexity of your question .
Why buy whole life insurance ? Well I bought whole life for several reasons , maybe they apply to someone else , maybe not . Life insurance is a personal choice . I can only really tell you why I bought it over term . First , I planned on living as long as possible , term does not work if I do that . Then I like that the death benefit increased over time to help battle inflation . I liked that the cash values were mine to do with what ever I like with . I do n't have to ask permission to take money out or put money back , it is mine to decide . I like that the price is locked in . I like that the insurance company can not come back later and increase my costs . I have control . I like that when my health changed and I became uninsurable that I had policies I controlled that they could n't price me out of or change the terms of . They were mine , purchased when my health was excellent . Twenty years later , when my health went south , the policies did n't . I like that my cash values did n't count against my kids FASFA contribution count . I really like that in 2008 when my real estate , market investments all took a big dump on my portfolio , my whole life did n't go backwards in value . In fact that year it was my most profitable portfolio item . I like going to sleep at night knowing my policies will be there for my family if I do not awake , but I really like that these policies will not let me down or be subject to the extreme market ups and downs that the rest of my portfolio is . This is just a few things I can mention . There are many many more but hey it comes down to what you actually want to happen , not what somebody else tells you what you should want . If it does n't fit what you want , do n't buy it .
At what age can you get life insurance ? Usually `` you '' can purchase life insurance from the age of 18 on . Life insurance is considered a contract and in order to have a binding contract both parties must be of legal age . An insurance company can not contract with a 10 year old or a 15 year old legally . So how did my kids get life insurance before age ten ? Because I `` own '' the policies as their parent . I had an insurable interest to insure my kids and I went into a contract with an insurance carrier . My kids are simply the insured and because at the time of purchase they were not of age to be party to a legal contract , they can only be the insured until 18 and I could sign over ownership at that point in time .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
Is life insurance necessary for a single person ? I will answer based on my reasons for having life insurance when I was a single person , it is up to the reader to decide if that is a good reason or not . As a single person , I still had a mom , and had I died , it would fall upon mom to clean up my stuff . In no particular order the reasons for owning life insurance at that point in time in my life . I just died , I 'm sure that 's a whammy to my mom . I just died without life insurance sorry for the `` double whammy '' mom . My service ? Mom , I 'm sure you can borrow the money to bury me . Or tap your retirement plan or home equity ... My debts ? Well I 'm sure you do n't mind the calls and letters or even that college loan you cosigned for me paying it back after I just died . Time off your work mom ? I 'm sure if I die on a Saturday , you 'll be back at work on Mondaylike nothing happened and certainly your bills are paid well enough in advance that you can take unpaid time off to grieve . My dog , mom . Here 's my dog . take care of him for me will ya ? If I have n't listed enough reasons for a single person to consider the need for life insurance , well I guess I did it for dumb reasons . It could be your mom , dad , brother , sister or a good friend , why buy life insurance as a single person ? Cause you care enough about the people who care enough about you . For me , it was my mom . Now it 's my wife and kids . They actually would hate to lose me , I actually would hate to put a burden on their shoulders when I die , tomorrow or 50 years from now .
When adult children are looking for life insurance for their parents , I find that that most common scenario is this : 1 -RRB- The parents are OK with their children doing the research , but are not crazy about doing it themselves , or may be unable to tackle that task for health or cognitive reasons . 2 -RRB- Children are usually looking for a final expense policy that will take care of their parents ' funeral and burial costs , pay off misc bills that may be present at death , and pay costs of settling the estate . 3 -RRB- The parents may go along with a minimum amount of underwriting , but may balk if there is an exam required . If that is the type of scenario you are presented with , I recommend getting a simplified issue whole life insurance policy . If your parents have serious health issues , they may need to go with a guaranteed issue whole life policy that is graded during the first 2-3 years . You will need to sit down with your parents to get their list of medications and health conditions , then contact an agent who understands final expense insurance to see if they can qualify for a simplified issue whole life policy that pays 100 % from day one for death by any reason . Some tips : 1 -RRB- You will want to go with whole life because it is certain to be in effect when death occurs , as long as premiums are paid . 2 -RRB- Look for a policy that has premiums locked in . Surprisingly , some very popular policies offered to seniors have rates that go up as they age , often making them unaffordable just at the time when they are needed . 3 -RRB- If your parents do n't want to do a telephone interview , you can get them a guaranteed issue policy that does not require a phone interview . Best wishes and please do not hesitate to contact me or other life agents on this website for assistance .
Why do people buy whole life insurance ? Well , I can give you reasons I did . I simply liked what it does . I locked in a life time rate in a policy that grows over time and builds up cash values that I can get to really easily and I do n't have to ask permission from anybody to do so . I like that I own the policy , I control the policy . I like that as an investment it is dull , boring and does it job of a reasonable return at a minimal risk situation . I like after all my health changes -LRB- type II , A Fib -RRB- that I do not have to seek out life insurance again because I have mine , locked in for my life . I like how in 2008 when I lost ten years of growth off my investments and my home value dipped too , that my life insurance kept cooking along as if nothing happened . I like that something I have ca n't go backwards . I figured out a long time ago , whole life insurance is the most risky thing an insurance company can sell for an insurance company , that is why it is priced the way it is . Think about this if you were an insurance company and price based on risk to the company , would the things that could really cost you , do you charge a little or a lot ? This is also why a good disability policy is n't cheap either .
Why would you buy whole life ? Here 's why I bought it . I wanted lifetime coverage as I do n't think I would die in 10,20 or 30 years . I was young enough to purchase a fair amount of coverage because I was in good health and purchased it at a locked in price . A price that they ca n't come back and raise on me . The WL offered reasonable safe growth , certainty that allowed me to take more risk with my other investment choices . My whole life became `` if I screw everything else up , this wo n't let me down . '' My safety net . After 20 plus years of ownership , whole life has done what it promised me , been there when I needed it and did n't go backwards in 2008 when ten years returns were wiped off my mutual fund accounts and my home value dropped 40 % . My boring steady unexciting whole life remained faithful to me . Now in my 50 's as a type II diabetic who just had his heart rebooted -LRB- cardioversion -RRB- because of A FIB , I really really appreciate the fact I `` OWN '' my policy . They ca n't raise the price , they ca n't end it . I did n't rent it , I OWN it . Maybe some readers will get how important that is . For all the financial gurus who may have said this was a bad idea , I have to ask why are so many people in their 60 's seeking new insurance ? Could it be they listened to the wrong people when they were younger and healthier ? There are a ton of reasons to own whole life , there is . All I can say is it is the most boring product you can buy . It will do what it 's supposed to , without fanfare or up and down excitement . It 's the most boring financial product you can `` OWN '' . I hope that makes sense to some who read these posts .
In what way do you mean ? As a college funding choice , possibly , but it would require significant investment that might be better spent on the parents to insure college . A life insurance policy on a child is a good idea for several reasons . Set up properly it is a financial cornerstone to a sound financial portfolio beginning for a child as they grow into adulthood . Imagine locking in a price that is extremely low and having it gain in value over the years into adulthood . Add the option of guaranteed insurability to the plan and you 've taken away the ability for an insurance company to say `` no '' to your child in the future . That is extremely valuable . Now , let 's look at the sad side of insurance on a child . What if you need it ? As heartbreaking as it would be to lose a child , imagine having to figure out what you can `` afford '' for a service or headstone ? Imagine how much time you 'll need off of work and what your employer would cover salary wise ? For the same reason I purchased insurance as a young single man , long before I went into this business , I did n't want a double or triple whammy for my parents who would already be dealing with my death . Throw lost wages in there and having to find the money to bury me and I 've created devastation in my household . While may God forbid , if you were to lose a child , is n't that enough ?
What is the BEST life insurance company to work for is a really good question for a person looking to get into the business of life insurance . And Paul 's answer above here is an excellent answer ! I took it to be an opinion type question so I 'll give you my opinion as my answer . -LRB- In fact I really wanted to see how others answered this for my own curiosity ! -RRB- I have now worked for three different companies , but I really believe it depends more on the particular Agency you are associated with as to how much satisfaction and happiness you will derive . My set of values - which I believe most insurance agents share with regard to the business - makes me want to be sure that I 'm guiding my clients to the best possible product and company . What is best for the client will depend on the specific needs of the client . In my opinion the best product in the business of life insurance is Participating Whole Life , so I want to be working with the company that has the best value in participating whole life . As a new agent you will want to get the best training . Again I believe the Agency makes the most difference . Both the Guardian and NY Life have intensive training programs . Quite different from each other , but both good . MassMutual has the highest dividend interest of all the mutual companies and in my experience really lives by their motto , `` What 's Best for the Client '' . To that end they utilize a brokerage agency that allows their agents to shop some 50 other providers for products such as term policies that they do n't offer and to find the best deal for the client . They also have different contracts that an agent may choose from with which to associate themselves .
If you have individual health insurance the answer is definitely - NO . If you are covered under an employer 's group health plan the answer is almost always No as well . However , there is a very narrow circumstance where you might be able to add a parent onto your group coverage . I 've never seen it in real life but here 's how I understand it could be approached . First , you have to determine if your parent qualifies as a dependent under IRS guidelines . IRS guidelines say that if your parent is under age 65 , they have an annual income of less than $ 3650 and you pay more than half of your parent 's total support for the year you can claim them as a dependent . As you can see , these a some pretty hard criteria to meet but I 'm sure there have to be some people out there that fit this profile . Next , you will have to have a serious meeting with your employer and have family coverage available through your employer 's health plan . You ca n't add your parent as an individual . If your current coverage level is employee only you would have to change it to a level where two or more adults can be covered -LRB- e.g. - family coverage -RRB- . You must be prepared to provide documentation -LRB- tax filings , etc. -RRB- to your employer to support your request and , in all candor , I 'd visit with a family lawyer before meeting with your employer . It is highly likely that your HR person or the business owner has never been presented with this situation before and it 's such a rare situation that in some ways it defies common sense and is at odds with what is commonly accepted business personnel practices . Until your question prompted me to do some research my initial reaction was `` no way '' and I 've been in the business for 30 years . You should n't expect this to be easy to accomplish , you may have to be the educator and you may find yourself having to deal with your employer , their insurance broker/consultant and probably the health insurance carrier themselves and to be expecting resistance every step of the way .
You get the award for the interesting question of the day . I assume you are a dependent over age 18 to begin with but are still covered under your parents health insurance plan . If you have the financial ability to pay for your own health insurance then technically you can purchase your own coverage . However , a standard part of any insurance application is a section that asks you if you will have any other health insurance coverage in effect at the same time that you will have the policy you are applying for . This is so the insurance carrier you are applying with can coordinate their coverage with the other insurance plan you are covered under . A person can be double covered -LRB- increasingly rare these days -RRB- but you can not make a profit from being insured which would technically be feasible if you filed the same claim independently with each carrier and each insurance carrier was unaware of the other 's coverage of the claim . To notanswer this question honestlywould be toengage in fraud , which could result in claim denial and possible civil liability if the double coverage situation was uncovered . The odds are pretty good that as the claim went through the national data bases that the double coverage situation would be uncovered , it might take some time but it would probably eventually surface . Answering the question honestly , will result in your insurance carrier initiating a coordination of benefits process with your parents insurance carrier in the event of a claim . This would almost certainly result in them receiving some notification from their insurance carrier of this coordination of benefits activity and them becoming aware of the situation . While I understand everyone 's desire for privacy , as a parent myself , I would certainly want to be aware of any health care that my dependent children are receiving , especially when the parent to some extent or another is going to be paying part of the bill either as part of their basic premiums and quite likely as part of deductible and/or copay financial exposure . In essence hiding a separate insurance coverage and medical care from your parents will be very difficult to do and presents you with ethical issues you must be prepared to deal with . If you want total privacy from your parentsin these matters then you must be prepared to tell your parents you no longer want to be covered as a dependent and purchase your own coverage for which you are financially responsible .
end question
start question
health-insurance
What Do You Pay For Health Insurance ?
That 's a great question ! With your health insurance there are usually 3 parts that you pay - The premium , the deductible , and the co-pay . The premium is the amount that you pay monthly for the insurance . The deductible and co-pay are portions of the cost of the medical service that you share with the insurance company . The cost of your premium will normally increase with a low deductible , and decrease as you accept a greater part of the cost with a higher deductible . The actual cost of what you will pay will depend upon the company , policy , and amount of deductible and co-pay that you choose . When open enrollment comes back around this fall , go to the Affordable Care Act -LRB- Obamacare -RRB- site , and see if you can qualify for a subsidized policy on the site . Millions have found that they can get affordable coverage there . Thank you for asking !
How much you should be paying is a hard figure to try and quantify . The average cost in the country for a health insurance plan is $ 328 per month - however , this is only reflective upon a silver level plan -LRB- not all 2014 state figure averages are available yet -RRB- . While you can try to come up with an `` average '' cost , there 's too many factors that go into premium pricing to say how in relation that compares to you . In short , an `` average '' premium is a rather useless figure to the individual . It 's only representative to a large group - you could have people paying a small nominal amount -LRB- after factoring in subsidies -RRB- per month to several thousand dollars per month . Even for that there 's a ton of information to sift through to get an accurate representation . Under the Affordable Care Act , you have the options for bronze , silver , gold , and platinum level plans -LRB- as you go up in metal , the price goes up , but provides better benefits -RRB- - some areas also have a catastrophic plan available . In addition , your age is a big factor as well . The younger you are , the cheaper your premium - the older you are , the higher your premium . Also , if you use tobacco products , your premium can be increased up to 50 % as well . You may be able to qualify for a subsidy that can be used to reduce the cost of your health insurance premiums . I always recommend consulting with an experienced broker . We can help you determine the plan that 's going to be most suitable for your needs and budget . Please feel free to contact me for further assistance . Thanks very much .
I 'll keep this answer short and sweet ! As an experienced health insurance broker -LRB- 33 years -RRB- , this question is quite common . You may pay nothing at all -LRB- if you qualify for a full subsidy -RRB- or you may pay up to $ 1000 per month -LRB- or more -RRB- . There are many variables that determine your rate . But by shopping and comparing with an experienced broker , you 'll get the best rates , view the best available plans and get expert and unbiased advice .
This is a list of some of the general exclusions in a homeowners policy : 1 . Freezing , Discharge , Leakage or Overflow - Unoccupied Residence : We do not pay for damage if the dwelling is vacant , unoccupied -LRB- including temporary absence -RRB- or under construction , unless the insured takes reasonable care to : a. maintain heat in the building ; or b. shut off the water supply and completely empty liquids from any plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater or domestic appliance . If any insured fails to do this , we do not pay for loss caused by freezing or the resulting discharge , leakage , or overflow from the system , water heater or domestic appliance . 2 . Freezing , Thawing , Pressure or Weight of Ice or Water : We do not pay for damage to structures -LRB- other than buildings or carports -RRB- such as pools , fences , retaining walls , septic tanks , piers , wharves , foundations , patios , and paved areas caused by freezing , thawing , or pressure or weight of ice or water , whether wind driven or not . 3 . Theft : We do not pay for theft or attempted theft from the insured premises while the dwelling is : a. under construction and unoccupied ; or b. vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . Theft does not include acceptance of counterfeit money , fraudulent post office or express money orders , or acceptance of checks or promissory notes which are not paid upon presentation . We do not pay for theft or attempted theft committed by an insured or tenant . 4 . Vandalism or Malicious Mischief or Glass Breakage : We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or breakage of glass or other glazing materials while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . A dwelling under construction is not considered vacant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism , malicious mischief or glass breakage committed by a tenant . We do not pay for loss caused by vandalism or malicious mischief committed by an insured . We do not pay for loss caused by glass breakage committed by an insured while the dwelling is vacant for more than 60 consecutive days immediately before the loss . 5 . Seepage or Leakage : We do not pay for loss caused by repeated or continuous seepage or leakage of liquids or steam from within a plumbing , heating or air-conditioning system , water heater , or domestic appliance . We do pay for loss caused by the accidental leakage , overflow , or discharge of liquids or steam from a plumbing , heating , or airconditioning system or domestic appliance . We also pay the reasonable cost of removing and replacing those parts of the dwelling or related private structure necessary to make repairs . We do not pay for loss to the system or domestic appliance from which the liquid or steam escapes . 6 . Settling , Cracking , Shrinking , Bulging , or Expanding : We do not pay for loss caused by the settling , cracking , shrinking , bulging or expanding of a dwelling or other structure -LRB- or any part of them -RRB- , or pavements or patios . 7 . Vermin , Rodents , Insects or Domestic Animals : We do not pay for loss caused by vermin , rodents , insects or domestic animals . 8 . Smoke : We do not pay for damage caused by smoke from agricultural smudging or industrial operations . We do pay for direct loss by fire , explosion , or smoke -LRB- not otherwise excluded -RRB- which results from any of the above . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
Not seeking out the help of a health insurance professional who can show them health plans both on and off of the government health insurance marketplaces would be Number 1 . The second biggest mistake is focusing solely on the monthly premium . It is no secret now that health insurance has gotten substantially more expensive for most people . What is not discussed as much is that really understanding what you are buying when you purchase a heath insurance policy has become much more complicated . Even if you are at an income level where you qualify for a subsidy of your monthly premium , and possibly cost sharing reduction , through the government health insurance marketplace , that does n't mean the most people will understand what they are enrolling in from the information they see on the government web site . As this is a decision that is extremely hard to change once it is made , you need to do your homework before you buy . Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the plan you are considering ? Does the plan offer out-of-network coverage if you want to use a health care provider outside the network ? Do you have to get a referral from your Primary Care Physician before you can see a specialist ? Are the prescription drugs you are taking included in the insurance company 's prescription drug formulary ? And , if so , at what level are these medications covered and might you be required to go back and try other medications -LRB- even ones you have tried in the past and found not as effective as your current medication -RRB- before your current medication would be covered ? If you need access to the services of a nationally recognized facility such as M.D. Anderson or The Mayo Clinic would they be covered and , if they are , what steps would you have to go through to gain access to them ? If you do n't know the answer to all these questions and many more you are not really in the position of being an informed buyer and that 's why you need professional guidance from an experienced insurance broker . At today 's premium levels it is easy to settle for the lowest possible cost plan and just hope for the best . However , this could be a big mistake . Sometimes a relative small difference in monthly premium costs for a more expensive plan can save you hundreds or thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket expenses when you start needing health care services . This is something you need to think through before you purchase your health insurance coverage .
Saving for retirement as a 30 year old you have an advantage over a 50 year old you have time . First thing to do is start saving regularly now . You should take advantage of tax deferral plans to get the full effect of compound growth . In Canada that mean Registered Retirement Savings Plans -LRB- RRSPs -RRB- and Tax-Free Saving Accounts -LRB- TFSAs -RRB- . If you have an employer that will contribute match your contributions take advantage - that is free money . Financial or retirement planner can help you determine what your specific portfolio should look like , depending on your risk tolerance and time horizon . Financial planning , Retirement planning and Estate planning are all integrated . What you do with one often affects the other . The first step in planning for a Good Retirement is to start saving regularly as early as you can . The challenge often is that retirement seems so far away that it is easy to put off . Now that you have started saving , what are you saving for ? Deciding what a successful retirement means to you can be quite challenging . What do you want to do for the rest of your life ? A lifestyle planner can help . There is some information on this topic under retirement on my website www.jpw.ca if you are interested . Now that you have a basic idea of what your successful retirement means , the numbers can be `` crunched '' . Your retirement or financial planner can fine tune your retirement planning to make what you want to happen , happen . What particular investment vehicles you should use , depends on your individual situation . Be sure to take advantage of retirement plans that are tax deferred -LRB- in Canada , RRSPs and TFSAs -RRB- . Tax deferral allows you to get the full effect of compound growth . If you have further questions , or feel that I could be of assistance , please do not hesitate to contact me .
This is a great question . Homeowners insurance rates are on the rise in Oklahoma due to all of the claims activity over the past several years . There are many factors to what generates your homeowner 's insurance premium . I hope this makes sense to you and answers your question . Here are some questions that you need to answer prior to receiving a quotation . Where do you live ? Is it a rural area with a volunteer fire department or do you live in a city with a full time fire department ? In the event of a fire , how long would the response time be for the fire fighters to get to your house ? Where is the closest fire hydrant ? What 's the replacement cost of your home ? Not the value of your home . How old is your house ? What is the construction type of your house ? Brick house ? Frame ? Do you have a crawl space or a slab ? Do you have carpeted floors , tile , other ? If your home is older than 20 years , when was your roof last replaced ? Has the wiring been updated ? Has the plumbing been updated ? Do you have an alarm system ? Do you have any pets ? Any children ? Who is living in the home ? Any fireplaces or wood burning stoves ? What deductible amount are you comfortable with ? What do you do for a living ? Do you have a home business ? These are just a few of many questions that your agent or future agent should ask you . Please let me know if I can answer any additional questions or help you out in any way . All the best , Josh DeBoer Fred Daniel & Sons , Inc. www.fdands.com 918-582-8206
The where/who question is a great one !! Our belief at ' I Hate Buying Insurance ' is the UNDERWRITING is the tail that wags the dog -LRB- one of my fav southern sayings -RRB- . There are hundreds of options across the country for Term Life . Each carrier has a different underwriting appetite . Do you have 5 - 10 extra pounds to shed ? That will be a factor between when determining what health tier you qualify for . Most carrier have 4 tiers & are commonly called Standard , Standard Plus , Preferred , and Preferred Plus . Most life insurance shoppers understand that health plays a huge role in determining the `` rate '' you qualify for . Yet lifestyle , occupation , hobbies , family health history , & more play into the rate you qualify for . A top agency will work with dozens of carriers . What name , mascot , or even financial rating -LRB- do n't sweat A - vs. A + + -RRB- are all secondary to getting the best underwriting for your specific needs . One carrier may offer you Standard while a Preferred is available at a second . Another thing to consider as of this writing is a new generation of Term Life called `` Living Benefits Life '' -LRB- LBL -RRB- You DO N'T have to die to use you `` life '' insurance anymore . Several carriers offer the ability to accelerate when diagnosed with a range of Critical or Chronic Illnesses . Just think of it as accessing the bank vault early . If you were diagnosed with invasive cancer , would n't it be to get a large sum of cash to help pay for deductibles , time away from work , home health care , & travel to the hospital you need that is in a different state ? LBL life might just do all that for you My suggestion for shopping Term Life plans : 1 . If the agent or dot.com you call doesnt ask A LOT of questions about health , history , & lifestyle , RUN . All theyre doing is guessing . Accurate rates do NOT come from age , height/weight , & current tobacco use . The agent needs to interview you so youre matched with the right carrier . 2 . Dont be afraid to ask the agent , What underwriting factors lead you to this option vs. any other carrier ? 3 . See if the agent offers you a LBL option . IF NOT , it is my strong opinion that her/she is NOT on top of current trends . If an agent or dot.com is doing what is best for you , several ideas/options should be explored . If you have any questions or comments , reach out to us !
The definition of `` good '' varies from person to person and business to business . However , here are some of the aspects of a health insurance policy I advise my clients to be aware of and comfortable with : 1 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies you want to use in-network providers with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 2 -RRB- What would your coverage be -LRB- if any -RRB- if you want to use a health care provider who is not an in-network provider with the health insurance plan you are considering ? 3 -RRB- What is the pharmacy benefit under the health plan you are considering ? And , if you have specific prescription drug needs are they covered under the health insurance plan 's prescription formulary and to what extent are they covered -LRB- copays , co-insurance , deductible & co-insurance -RRB- ? 4 -RRB- Does the health insurance plan allow its members to go directly to specialists such as cardiologists or does it require that you are referred to a specialist by your primary care physician first ? 5 -RRB- If you travel regularly outside of your home area -LRB- to other states or outside the USA -RRB- does the health plan provide for coverage outside of your home service area in the event you need non-emergency care ? 6 -RRB- Is the health insurance company you are considering a well established national or regional health insurance carrier with strong finances or is it one of the new , experimental Co-Op health plans recently established under the provisions of ObamaCare ? 7 -RRB- Does the overall value proposition of the health insurance plan you are considering meet your current and anticipated needs ? In other words , does its monthly premium , coverage levels and provider network really work for you .
Very carefully . Shopping for health insurance has never been particularly easy for the average person and with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act it is more complicated than ever and the consequences of making a bad decision or no decision can have significant financial implications . Web sites , whether they are Healthcare.gov or insurance agent or insurance carrier based can only go so far . Buying health insurance is n't like buying a hotel room online , as a lot of people who enrolled themselves through Healthcare.gov have painfully learned . The bottom line is that you should seek out an experienced health insurance agent who represents multiple health insurance carriers and who is certified to sell coverage through Healthcare.gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace . You can no longer assume that your doctor is available as an in-network provider with every health insurance plan offered by a health insurance company that you think you are familiar with . For instance , here in Tennessee the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan offers identical looking health plans through Healthcare.gov with three different PPO networks each of which has a different price point . The lower the monthly premium gets the narrower the provider network gets . Human nature is to gravitate towards the lowest cost plan if the benefits look the same and that 's fine until you find out your long time doctor does n't participate in that product 's network . In the world of ObamaCare once you 've enrolled and the open enrollment period has closed you are stuck with your plan selection until next year 's open enrollment . If you are using specific prescription medications you really need to do your homework there and that 's where having professional guidance is so crucial . You should verify if your medication is covered in the prescription formulary of any health insurance carrier you are considering . Then , if it is covered , at what tier level in the pharmacy coverage is it covered ? Will the insurance carrier require you to get reauthorized to continue using that medication or require you to reinvent the wheel and go through what is referred to as step therapy where you may have to try to use other , less expensive medications to treat your condition before you are allowed to continue using your current medication ? These are all real possibilities and I have n't come across an individual consumer yet who figured these things out on their own . What coverage does the insurance plan you are considering offer if you want to go outside of their network ? Some health insurance brands you may have been familiar with in the past have totally reworked their individual insurance products so as to provide little or no out-of-network coverage . What is the health insurance plan 's policy on access to facilities such as M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other such nationally prominent specialty health care providers ? You should not assume that all health plans will allow access to such facilities . If you have a chronic health problem or have had a family history of health issues where access to such facilities might be important to you , it 's better to figure that out in advance . THIS ANSWER WAS PROVIDED BY : Marlin McKelvy , a Chartered Benefits Consultant with 30 years of industry experience and a web site at www.cdbsagency.com but who is committed to providing personalized advice and guidance because an informed client is a happy client .
Why buy private health insurance ? Well , honestly for a while longer you do n't have to if you do n't want to . The choice to insure has been a personal one in this country for some time . If you did not wish to have coverage , you did n't have to carry any . But here 's the rub to deciding not to have health insurance . If you have a medical need and the means to come close to paying the BILL that comes along with treating the need , the BILL will be treated as any other BILL a person receives in their lifetime . That is , if you decide not to pay it and you have assets or the means to pay it , the hospital or doctor will act just like any other entity out there and send you to collections for recovery . The people Hospitals and Doctors `` write off '' do not have the means to pay for a premium . They have nothing of value . So yes , they do get their care without charges . If you have the means to pay and do n't , a hospital or Doctor will not treat you the same way . Besides all insurance does is cover for risk you do not want to self insure for . You can either pay for an insurance policy or pay out of your assets , entirely for now , your choice .
Bottom line question : What is the best type of life insurance to have ? Bottom line answer : The type that is in force when you die.Keep in mind that life insurance is the only financial vehicle that provides an income-tax free lump sum of money to the one who depends on the insured person financially upon the trigger-point of the contract : the death of the insured . Focus on that death benefit or face amount . Do n't be distracted by cash values , living benefits , etc. to begin with . -LRB- That can come later -RRB- . As far as choosing a `` good life insurance policy '' , the answers are endless . But , here are a few basic parameters to guide you to the answer that is best for you :1 . Ask the beneficiary , `` What would you do if I -LRB- the proposed-insured -RRB- were to die today ? '' . `` Do '' is the key word . This is not a quantitative inquiry . It has to do with values . What matters most to the person you care about ? 2 . Then , `` what would be the negative financial impact to the beneficiary if I were to die today ? '' This is n't that hard for most people . It has to do directly with what the beneficiary believes they would do if the insured dies . For instance , if the beneficiary would sell the house , do n't put that into the equation . If there 's debt , do put it in the equation . Income replacement is typically the most important . But , it may not be if there are no children and the beneficiary has a career . See ? It all depends on what the beneficiary would do . 3 . Once the amount is determined , my suggestion is to first buy a permanent plan of insurance that would cover final expenses . That does n't have to be a large face amount . But , it should be big enough to take care if immediate funeral and burial costs projected to mortality age .4 . Cover the rest of the need with low-cost , guaranteed level premium and fully convertible -LRB- exchange all or part of the term to a permanent plan of insurance without the need to medically qualify -RRB- term.Now you can discuss bells and whistles . But , only pay the extra amount those cost if -LRB- big if -RRB- they have value specific to your situation . An experienced agent who actively listens -LRB- let 's you talk more than s/he does -RRB- can guide you .
This is a really good question . Everybody asks it . You do have some options . Lets see what the ramifications would be of choosing each one . You could drop it when you feel it has outlived its use . Lets suppose you originally bought a policy for family protection . But now , the kids are out of the house . You probably feel you dont need life insurance any more . But what about the next stage of your life ? And the stage after that ? What if you need to maximize your pension distribution ? What if a child - or for that matter a parent - becomes dependent on you later in life ? What if you want to leave a legacy of charitable bequests ? What if you want to start a business after you retire , and need to indemnify a bank loan ? Sure , you could always pick up coverage at that point . You think . Assuming you qualify medically and otherwise . And assuming you want to pay the extra cost due to a higher age . Then again , you could drop it when you feel you can afford to self-insure . So now you have a accumulated a sizable portfolio of assets . Your net worth is right up there . Why should you pay for life insurance when there is so much money at the disposal of your heirs ? But if you have demonstrated such savvy in reaching this pinnacle of success , you would certainly consider the following : What percentage of your asset portfolio is liquid ? Life insurance would pay your beneficiaries within days . If any bills have to get paid right off the bat , they will need liquidity . What about a estate equalization ? Some of your heirs may be in business with you and therefore inherit the firm . What about your children who are not working with you ? You probably want to take care of them as well . Life insurance could give them the same value as those children who inherit your business property . How about estate taxation ? Why would you want to pay Uncle Sam a ton of money dollar for dollar when you could have a life insurance policy take care of that obligation for pennies on the dollar ? The bottom line is that you could drop your life insurance any time you want . You just need to be prepared to face the consequences .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
Why is universal life insurance bad ? Hmmm . It all depends . Do you want the lowest possible rate for temporary coverage ? Maybe 10 or 15 or 20 or 30 years ? Buy some term insurance . Universal life will be more expensive . But of course , the renewal premium could be sky high . Do you want very significant cash accumulation , on both a guaranteed and a non - guaranteed basis ? Buy whole life insurance . Universal life probably wont give you the same numbers . But of course , you pay extra in premium for those guarantees . And it is a fixed-premium product , so you better keep paying . Then again , perhaps you want flexibility on the payment premium schedule . Perhaps you want to put in more money . Or maybe put in less money . Or maybe skip a payment . You can do all this with universal life insurance . Just make sure you know what you are doing so the policy still performs as expected . Maybe you want to lock in to a premium for the rest of your life and not have to worry about the price ever going up . But you dont want to pay an arm and a leg for the coverage . You could buy universal life insurance with a lifetime guarantee . You wont accumulate much cash , but hey , you will have saved a ton of money in premium , as compared to whole life . Lets say you have a chronic medical condition which could pose a higher mortality risk . But you still want to save money on the cost . Perhaps an insurance company will give you a concession on the price ? Could they do that with term insurance ? No . Could they do that with whole life insurance ? No . Could they do that with universal life insurance ? Yes , there is a very good chance they could . Its called table shaving . Its a perk that has saved people a lot of money . What do you think is bad about the product ? Want to learn more ? Read my blog : planrisklive.com
-- > Normal 0 What makes up a good homeowners insurance policy ? In my mind its a policy that is going to do what you want it to do , at a price you are willing to pay . The problem is , most insurance buyers dont really know what they want the policy to do . Most people seem to want a policy to repair or replace their home if its damaged . To me that means you want an all-risk policy on your home with a Guaranteed Replacement Cost feature , which automatically increases your amount of insurance following a loss , to whatever it takes to rebuild your home if it is damaged and has to be rebuilt . All - Risk type policies will not cover everything but they will specifically state what you are not covered for and you can decide where to go from there . Few policies include the Guaranteed Replacement feature ; so make sure you ask for it . And if the company doesnt offer it , you may want to check with someone else . Most people also want their personal stuff replaced should it be damaged or destroyed . So a good homeowners policy should do that . That means , all-risk replacement cost coverage for all your stuff . If its not all-risk -LRB- often called Special Coverage or Open Perils -RRB- Replacement Cost , you may want to look further . Again , not all types of damage will be covered but the policy will tell you what you are not covered for so you wont have any surprises . Often specific exclusions can be eliminated for an additional cost . Most policies dont include these features so make sure you ask for them if that is the kind of coverage you expect . Good homeowners policies will include coverage for the additional expenses you may incur should your home be damaged and you have to live somewhere else while it is being repaired and a nominal amount of Personal Liability coverage , a good one will have limits not less than $ 300,000 . A good homeowners policy will be offered by a financially strong , at least A-rated insurance company hopefully with a local contact to help you understand what you are getting , makes sure it covers any special situations that make up your life and is there should you have a significant claim . A good homeowners policy is one that doesnt get cancelled the first time you have a claim . Buying insurance on-line may be popular and convenient but you have to know what you are doing . Remember if there is a problem , you are one small policy and they are one big insurance company . It may be a good time to have somebody local on your side .
The trick to this is getting quotes that are comparable.There are so many more nuances in Homeowners coverages than on auto . So start out with what coverages you have now . Start with the amount of insurance on Coverage A of your policy . Does this really reflect the replacement cost of your property ? Now look at the ancillary coverages : Do you have water/sewer back up ? Does the limit include both dwelling and contents or only one or the other . Do you have Law and Ordinance Coverage what is the percentage ? What about personal injury coverage ? Do you have a schedule or need specific coverage on jewelry , watches or furs or similar expensive items limited in the existing policy by a dollar value ? If so what is it ? Do you need special circumstantial coverage for a home based business , ? Do you have home Warranty Coverage ? Do you have Earthquake coverage ? Is it constrained by a per cent deductible ? If so what is it ? I think you will get the picture . then I would suggest you give an independent agency a call or visit their website . We would be glad to help you , but perhaps you are not in the Atlanta area and want some local contact . We understand that but our recommendation to an independent agent is still sound advice as they typically will have multiple companies to compare .
What do you mean by government health insurance ? If you are asking about a government health insurance plan such as Medicaid then I guess you could say it 's cheap as that is a program for the poor for which they do n't really pay anything . If you are asking about health insurance for Federal government employees they have many health insurance plan options at different price points to choose from . I do n't think many government employees think their health insurance is cheap even though their coverage is largely paid for by the government . Certainly in comparison to most of their peers in private sector companies these days most government employees pay less for their health insurance coverage .
My sick sense of humor almost tempts me to say `` No , real estate agents are specifically excluded from getting health insurance by law '' but I wo n't do that . Yes , you can get health insurance . What you do for a living has no bearing on your eligibility for health insurance , especially now that ObamaCare is in full effect regarding guaranteed issuance of policies . In my experience , most real estate agents are self-employed/1099 contractor status people and not W2 employees of an agency . So , this probably means that you will need to get individual health insurance either through your state 's government health insurance marketplace or outside of it . So , just like you would tell those `` For Sale By Owner '' folks , you need to seek out an experienced health insurance agent who can assist you in obtaining coverage . If you have been without health insurance for more than 60-days and have n't had what is called a `` change of life status event '' -LRB- marriage , divorce , childbirth/adoption , loss of other coverage -RRB- then you are in a time frame where you would be ineligible for enrollment in true major medical insurance until the next annual open enrollment period begins on November 15th , 2014 and the earliest your coverage could go into effect would be for January 1st , 2015 . I hate to be the one to deliver this news but that is how ObamaCare works . Your only coverage option to carry you through until then would be to take out a Short Term Medical insurance plan . There are a variety of short term medical plan options available . However , you need to be aware that short term medical plans do still use limited underwriting questions , can decline a person for coverage and they do not cover pre-existing conditions . Please feel free to contact me if you need advice or assistance in this matter .
Here is what Suze says about permanent insurance on her website : I HATE WHOLE LIFE INSURANCE I HATE UNIVERSAL LIFE INSURANCE I HATE VARIABLE LIFE INSURANCE THE ONLY TYPE I LIKE FOR THE PURPOSES FOR INSURING YOUR LIFE IS TERM INSURANCE ! If you are smart with the money you have today and you get rid of your mortgages , car loans and credit card debt and put money into retirement plans you dont need insurance 30 years from now to protect your family when you die . WEBSITELINK Lets think about this perspective for a second . She basically believes that family protection is the sole reason why people buy life insurance . Once the kids are out of the house , and you dont have any more debt , and you can afford to self-insure , you dont need a policy . This may be true for some people , but it is not true for many others . Consider some of the what ifs : What if your elder parents become dependent on you ? What if you need to secure a pension distribution ? What if you incur an estate tax obligation ? What if you want to leave a gift to your favorite charity ? What if you start a business when you retire as many people do and you need to indemnify a loan , or fund a partnership agreement ? These are all reasons for why people need life insurance after the family protection stage . They should be considered when people do their life insurance planning .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Travelers Auto Insurance Cover Rental Cars ?
Coverage can vary by State . In Texas , a standard private passenger auto insurance policy will cover you in a rental car as a tempory substitute - and damage to the rental unit actually comes under the Property Damage coverage for contractual liability . Although it IS covered , I STILL buy the physical damage waiver coverage offered by the rental companies . I do n't want the rental company filling a claim on the vehicle for something I was NOT responsible nor tagging my credit card for a LARGE amount and using up my credit limit . Hope this helps !
-- > Normal 0 Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have liability and physical damage insurance on a car that you own that coverage should extend to other cars you might be driving including a short-term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most renters fail to read it . Rental agreements often say you understand and accept the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any -LRB- or very little -RRB- if you have an accident . Most rental agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . Your car insurance will not cover that . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgments they are required to pay . Your insurance policy may not cover that . Some of these risk assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you have given them permission to add these charges to your credit or debit card . Although you often hear your own insurance covers you when you rent a car that may only be a partial answer . Your insurance may cover some of the rental car expenses but not all of them . Make sure you understand what those expenses are , which ones your own auto insurance or personal umbrella covers you for and which ones you will be required to pay out of your own pocket . If these risks are more than you are comfortable with , the only other alternatives are to purchase the very expensive `` Damage Waiver '' coverage from the rental car company or simply do n't rent the car .
If you own a car and have your own auto insurance policy it still may make sense to carry the coverage that a rental car company offers . Most auto insurance companies will extend the liability and physical damage coverage to a car you rent . However , they usually will not cover `` loss of use '' . Even though your insurance will normally fix the car , the rental company will bill you for the daily rental of that car until it 's repaired and put back into service . Your auto insurance wo n't usually cover this cost . Think about it this way : if the car costs $ 30/day to rent and it takes 2 weeks to fix it and put it back in service , the rental car company will expect you to pay that $ 420 that it could have gotten if they had the car to rent . Their coverage will normally waive these costs . If you do n't carry physical damage on your own car , then you also have no physical damage coverage on a rental car . So , if you do n't have your own auto policy , or you do n't have physical damage coverage on your policy , I would recommend taking the rental company 's coverage . I would also recommend it if you do n't want to run the risk of having to pay loss of use charges after an accident .
Renting a car is n't the problem , if you have insurance covering a car that you own , often the coverage on that car will extend to other cars you might be driving including a short term rental car . The problem is n't the rental car , it 's the rental agreement you sign and most often fail to read . These agreements often will say you understand the insurance the rental company carries on the car will not apply to you or in some cases it applies only up to the state minimum . So if you do n't have your own coverage , there wo n't be any if you have an accident . Many of these agreements require you to be responsible for any damage to the car even if it is not your fault . Knowingly or unknowingly , you assume a responsibility you normally do not have . If the rental car is damaged , the agreements usually say you agree to pay not only for the repair or replacement of the car but also the loss of rental revenue the company loses while the car is being repaired and any administrative costs the rental company incurs as a result of that damage . You also commonly agree to reimburse the rental company for any legal expenses or judgements they are required to pay . You assume all the risks , they assume none . Some of these assumptions may covered by the insurance you might have on your own car but many may not and that is where the problem lies . They have your credit card and you give them permission to add these charges to your card . It may not be necessary to purchase insurance when you rent a car , but be aware of what you are agreeing to . Make sure you accept those potential risks , are covered for them by your own auto insurance or personal umbrella , are willing to pay those hefty waiver charges or simply do n't rent the car .
-- > Normal 0 It is my understanding you will find CDW in many car rental agreements and it is an abbreviation for Collision Damage Waiver . When you rent a car , you are required to sign a rental agreement . Most renters fail to read the agreement but in most cases the agreement states you agree to accept full responsibility should the car is damaged in any way , even if that damage is not your fault ! For an additional daily charge , often $ 20 or more , rental companies will not charge you should you return their car with damage or report it stolen . Thats a pretty hefty charge for what many would consider one day 's comprehensive and collision coverage . Annualized that amounts to rental customers paying more than $ 7000 a year just for potential damage to the car ! Your own car insurance may extend to cover damage to cars you rent but check with your agent or insurer to make sure . Even if your insurance coverage extends to cover a rental car you are driving , it may not cover all the charges the rental company makes you responsible for . Often when signing the rental agreement , you assume responsibility for the loss of value to their car if it is damaged , the loss of rental revenue they lose while the car is being repaired and even their administrative costs incurred as a result of the damage . These costs are usually not covered by most personal auto insurance policies . And more than likely , you have given the rental company permission to put those charges right on your credit card . Be alert !
While it may be true your own liability , comprehensive and collision coverage may extend to cover you when renting a car , most of the rental agreements I have read make the renter responsible for expenses not covered by most auto insurance policies . In addition to the responsibility for the deductible , most rental companies make you reimburse them for the loss of value to their damaged car , the revenue they lose while the car is out of service and even the administrative costs they incur having the car repaired . These costs are not covered by most auto insurance policies . Remember you gave them your credit card and permission to put those charges right on your card . That might make your trip one you will remember ! And the damage to the rental car might not even be your fault ! Unless you have a good personal umbrella policy without a following form auto limitation and/or personal property care custody or control exclusion , I suggest you consider buying the damage waiver rental companies offer . The price is ridiculously high but it avoids an argument with a big company who would have your money and doesnt like to give it back . If more people would read the rental agreement and object to accepting responsibility for these costs , maybe the rental companies would remove these indemnity clauses for many of their good repeat rental customers . Until then it may be a matter of Pay me now or Pay me later .
You 're going to want to read your policy . Often times , your auto insurance will extend the highest level of coverage on your policy to a vehicle you are driving with permission or renting . If you have full coverage -LRB- ie . comprehensive and collision coverage -RRB- , you would be extended full coverage . However , almost all insurance policies exclude coverage for loss of use of that other vehicle and will only pay market value for the loss of the vehicle . So , if you are in an accident with a rental car , the rental company has the right to charge you for each day it is out of service being repaired -LRB- YOU PAY THIS , NOT INSURANCE -RRB- . Also , if the auto company has a value on the books of $ 20,000 for the vehicle and your insurance company only pays $ 15,000 for the car in a total loss , you are responsible for the difference . EVERY insurance agent who knows anything , would tell you to take the third party insurance coverage . If you plan ahead however , Travel Guard by Chartis offers the same coverage the rental companies will , minus liability which would be through your insurance , to protect against the loss of use and the difference in value .
It depends . Insurance sold by the car rental companies is expensive , and is a major source of profit for them . According to most state statutes , the rental company is required to automatically provide you with the minimum liability limits required in that state . Most people would want more coverage than the state minimum , so there are several options to consider . 1 . Check your own personal auto policy and see if it covers cars you rent for personal use . If it does , then there is n't anything else you need to do , your current policy covers you . 2 . Another option is to check and see if the credit card you use to rent the car provides you with any insurance protection . Many do , and they provide at least as much coverage as the deductible you have on your own policy . 3 . Finally , if none of these options are satisfactory , then you should consider buying insurance from the car rental company . The above options only apply for personal use of the rental car . If you are using the car for business purposes , you should check and make sure your employer has `` hired and non-owned '' auto insurance coverage - this will cover you . If not , then you should consider buying the insurance from the rental company .
The insurance company you currently have your auto insurance with may extend coverage to a rental car . If so you do have the option of waiving the coverage offered by the rental car agency . I recommend you contact your agent to verify if your coverage applies to a rental car since not all polices will extend to rental cars . Also depending on the state you are in there are advantages of purchasing the rental cars insurance . For example if you have a solo car accident the damage will be picked up by the rental car agency and not your own insurance carrier thereby avoiding any potential points that may apply . But again , I strongly suggest you contact your agent if you are not sure that your current insurance carrier will extend coverage to a rental car .
Always check with your insurance professional before renting a car . Generally speaking , unless you have special limits found in a non standard policy , the coverage you have on your personal auto policy does extend over to rental cars while they temporarily replace yours . Keep in mind , though that if you have an older car , for example , and are not carrying Collision on your policy , you will not have collision on the rental . The Liability coverage you have transfers fully , but comp and collision only transfer if you have them . Remember though that I referred to a rental car . This extension of coverage does not necessarily include rental vans or trucks used for moving or hauling.One other thing to keep in mind . Many credit card ccontracts provide some limited coverage if used when renting a car.This is usually up to $ 500.00 which may be enough to cover the deductible from your personal auto policy .
Without specifics , `` it depends ... '' on what state the policy is written in . I am in New York and the NY Personal Auto Policy is required -LRB- by statute -RRB- to have some type of `` Rental Vehicle Coverage Endorsement ' . It is not optional . The endorsement sets forth an Insuring Agreement , Definitions , Priority of Payment , Exclusions , Subrogation , Duties after an Accident or Loss , and General Provisions . Coverage for the actual damage to or loss ofthe rental vehicle -LRB- with limitations -RRB- is provided ` regardless of fault . ' The endorsement does not set forth value or limit . Theoretically , I can rent a Rolls Royce , total it , and my carrier most likely pays the rental company the $ 350,000 value of the car including loss of use . My NY Rental Vehicle Coverage does not pay the ` reduction/diminution in value of the vehicle ' in the event it is repairable - thiscoveragecannot be added to my policy . Diminution of Value coverage is available through the physical damage insurance offered by the rental company -LRB- aka the collision damage waiver , etc -RRB- . A thorough reading of an Erie Personal Auto Insurance policy issued in your state is warranted as my answer only applies to theNew York Personal Auto Policy . Commercial or Business auto policies address rental vehicles in a different manner - a topic for a separate question .
If you have a personal auto coverage and you rent a car your existing auto policy will cover you in the rental car , but if you have an accident you will have to pay your normal deductible . The rental car companies make a LOT of money from selling really overpriced insurance and in general it 's a good idea to just say no as long as you do have a personal auto policy . If you do n't have a personal auto policy then you do need to get the rental insurance to at least have the legally required liability coverage . Many credit cards also provide you some rental car insurance for free , so check with your credit card company too .
Rental car insurance is available from rental car agencies . If you own an insured car the insurance from that car extends to a rental car which means that purchasing the coverage from the rental agency is not necessary . If you do not own a car , it is possible to purchase non-owned auto insurance which would eliminate the requirement for buying liability insurance from the rental agency . You would still need physical damage coverage .
I think your question may be a bit different than perceived by the earlier respondent . Are you asking if you fly to another location and rent a car is that covered as a temporary vehicle or not and then if it is a temporary vehicle does your own insurance apply or do you need to buy liability coverage at the rental counter . If I understand the question correctly the answer is that it depends . You may have coverage as a temporary substitute vehicle to the extent that you have coverage on the vehicle you are substituting for . I would suggest you discuss this issue with your agent , so he can review what exactly you have coverage for . Keep in mind that auto insurance in the US is typically limited to the US and Canada not Mexico so when you travel to another country be sure to go over your itinerary with your agent . Some countries like Mexico do not recognize US insurance as being valid . If you get to the rental counter in another country and forgot to review things with your agent then do this . Buy at least the minimum liability coverage they have required of the locals .
Rental car companies offer a physical damage option as an amendment to their standard contract . This option , offered for an additional daily charge , provides for covreage in the event that their car is damaged while in your posession and control . But before you sign on the dotted line for this , check with your insurance professional to see if your personal auto policy extends coverage on to rental cars . If it does , then save yourself the money on the rental agreement and do n't accept the option . Also , check with your bank card provider . Many include coverage on rental cars usually up to $ 500.00 .
My previous career was for a rental company so I have a great deal of knowledge in this area . When determining purchasing insurance when renting a car it is important to consider these main factors . 1 -RRB- Quality of your own insurance policy If you have state minimum coverage dont except much help from your insurance company if something were to happen . 2 -RRB- Purpose of Rental - Yes , The reason why you are renting the car plays a big factor . Some insurance policies will only cover rental vehicles if it is a replacement rental . So if you are renting for a family vacation there is a possibility that you arent covered . Always check with your insurance company . 3 -RRB- Type of Vehicle Another huge factor , a lot of policies wont cover any vehicles that are built on a pick up truck frame . Most consumers are unaware that some minivans and SUVs are in fact built upon a pickup truck frames . The best way to protect yourself against this is to always rent a vehicle that similar to the car on your policy -LRB- If you have a SUV on your policy , you should be safe to drive a SUV -RRB- 4 -RRB- Does your credit card cover it ? A little known benefit -LRB- that most credit cards have -RRB- is rental coverage ! Some will require you to activate it before renting a vehicle while others will give it you automatically . I would always check with your credit card provider to see which type of coverage you have . They often pay for loss-of-use as well which is an extra bonus that most insurance policies wont cover . 5 -RRB- The Length of the rental - The longer the rental the more expensive the rental insurance becomes . At some point the amount of money you are paying for the extra insurance isnt going to be worth it . That breaking point is up to you to decide . 6 -RRB- If something were to happen right now , what can you afford ? I think this is the most important . The most common rental is a 3 day weekend rental . The typical insurance cost for that that length of time can be $ 60 to $ 200 . However , the cost of damage , loss of use , and deductibles can add up to be $ 2,000 and get as high as the total loss value of the vehicle . If you were to total out a vehicle would your insurance cover it ? Or could you afford a $ 20,000 vehicle that you wont drive ? 7 -RRB- Remember it is not your vehicle ! Very often damage happens to our own vehicle and we dont even notice or care because we consider the damage to be minimal . However this is not the case when renting a vehicle . You do not have control over what damages are fixed and which ones arent . So Keep in mind that a ding to you , could be consider major damage to them . At the end of the day , you have to be honest with yourself and determine if purchasing the extra insurance is worth it or not . Not every situation is a same and multiple factors needs to be taken into account .
As a rule of thumb I always recommend you have as much coverage on a rental car as you would the cars you own . Typically , this is not an issue because most agents will automatically put you down for `` non-owned/hired '' autos on your personal policy . This is just an endorsement to your policy that will extend your liability and collision coverage to cars you are legally borrowing or renting . Make sure you check your policy for an endorsement like this . Other options : you can get rental insurance through the car rental agency or your credit card sometimes offers coverage for rental cars , just call the company and ask .
That is going to depend on the rental car company . Most rental car company 's are going to require any party that is renting a car from them have auto insurance coverage . If you do not have auto insurance and need to rent a car , it is possible that the rental company can provide coverage on a temporary basis .
I would like to add my two cents to this question , as Im not sure a couple of situations have been covered . But the question is Can I insure a car I dont own . If you own and insure a car , your own policy should extend your coverage to any car you are driving -LRB- borrowed , temporary substitute or short-term rental -RRB- as long as it is not another car you own or regularly use . In that sense , your policy then insures you driving a car you dont own . If you dont own a car but often drive cars you dont own and want to make sure you are adequately covered , you should be able to purchase a form of Drive Other Car coverage . Its common to see this coverage on business auto policies covering the business owner and family members when the business owner doesnt own a personal car but is provided vehicles by the company . Here again you are in a sense insuring a car you dont own . In my practice , I like to make sure every client has access to an automobile insuring agreement , as a named insured on a policy covering an owned car , as a spouse or family member residing in the household or some form of Drive Other Car coverage . I like to see adequate limits , comprehensive and collision and appropriate uninsured/underinsured coverage . No responsible adult should be without some form of auto insurance coverage ; as an owner , operator , passenger or pedestrian .
All auto insurance can provide you reimbursement for auto rentals ONLY IF you get that endorsement on your policy . The typical reimbursement for rental cars is $ 20/day up to $ 600 total . Most insurance companies will let you increase this up to around $ 50/day and $ 1,500 total . There is no standardized wording for this endorsement , either . I have seen it called `` rental reimbursement , '' `` rental coverage , '' `` rental guarantee . '' So , when you are looking through your policy to see if you have some type of rental coverage you need to look carefully .
end question
start question
disability-insurance
What Is Elimination Period In Disability Insurance ?
The elimination period in Disability Insurance is the period of time between becoming disabled and when benefits begin to be paid to the disabled employee . With Long Term Disability , a period of one to six months is usually selected as the elimination period . Generally , the shorter the elimination period , the higher the premium paid for the policy .
Similar to disability income insurance , long-term care insurance has an `` elimination period '' . This is like a `` time deductible '' during which one has to pay out-of-pocket for care costs while satisfying the elimination period . Elimination periods are chosen by the applicant and are usually 30 - , 60 - , 90 - , 180 - , or 365-days . The longer the elimination period , the lower the premium.Some carriers provide a 0-day elimination period for home care , either as part of the policy or as an extra-cost add-on rider . If a person goes on claim at home , they may receive approved claim payments -LRB- reimbursement plan -RRB- or cash -LRB- indemnity plan -RRB- as soon as they are declared eligible for payment by the carrier . The contract indicates what the insured needs to submit to the carrier in order to be approved for payment of care costs or to receive a cash payout.There are two ways an elimination period may be satisfied : - Service Days . The insured must pay for care on any given day in order to satisfy one day of the elimination period . For example , the insured has chosen a 90 day elimination period . The insured must pay for long-term care services out-of-pocket for a total of 90 days -LRB- they do not have to be consecutive -RRB- before the elimination period is satisfied . If the person is paying for home care , satisfying the elimination period could take longer than 90 consecutive days if care is not needed on any given day or days . Carriers may have different ways of calculating the fulfillment of the elimination period using the `` service days '' method . - Calendar days . The elimination period is satisfied when a majority of days during the elimination period required care and the insured paid out of pocket . In other words , the insured does not have satisfy the elimination period with days where services were paid out of pocket . Each carrier defines how the elimination period is satisfied using the calendar day method . This method is often offered as an additional cost rider.If a person goes immediately into a full-service nursing facility , the elimination period will be fulfilled as care is received . All facility care will need to be paid out-of-pocket by the insured or the insured 's family during that period of time . It wo n't matter that much which type of elimination fulfillment method is used in such a case unless the person leaves the facility before the elimination period is fully satisfied.Some carriers do not offer a calendar day method for satisfying the elimination period . Some have a choice between the two . Some carriers only have a calendar day elimination period . Once the elimination period is satisfied in full , it does not have to be satisfied again . Since the way a carrier allows for the fulfillment of the elimination period can be the difference in hundreds - if not thousands - of dollars in out-of-pocket payments , the prospect for long-term care insurance should make this a priority question before choosing a carrier . Be sure that you read the section of a specimen or sample policy on `` Payment of Claims '' so that you understand how the proposed insurance company defines `` when long-term insurance kicks in '' .
The important factors that will play a large role in both the cost of a DI policy and how meaningful the benefit will be to a individual are ; The benefit amount , the elimination period , the duration of the benefit period , and the way in which the policy defines a disability . The benefit amount , the recurring monthly income your disability policy pays you while you are injured , represents the most important aspect of the coverage . Laws in most states limit disability insurance benefits to two-thirds of your current gross income . While most people select the maximum available benefit , you can choose lower amounts if your personal cash reserves are sufficient to supplement disability income payments . After you meet the criteria and are eligible to begin receiving income from your disability insurance policy , the length of time you must wait before payments begin is called the elimination period . Most major insurance carriers offer the same standard elimination periods ranging from one month to one year . Longer periods result in lower policy premiums . Once you begin receiving payments from your disability policy , they will continue until you are no longer disabled or your benefits have been exhausted . Disability insurance policies with maximum benefit periods of two years or less are classified as short-term disability products . If you own a short-term policy , payments will continue every month but will cease after two consecutive years . Policies with maximum benefit periods beyond two years are classified as long-term disability products . The most common benefit period choices for long-term policies are three years , five years , ten years or until age 65 . Every insurance company has its own formal definition of a disability , and benefit payments will not start unless your status falls within these guidelines . Some companies define disability as an inability to perform any gainful income-producing work at all . Collecting benefits under policies purchased from these carriers often presents a significant challenge . Thankfully , a large percentage of carriers consider you disabled if you are unable to perform the substantial duties of your own current employment position , a policy feature commonly referred to as `` own occupation . '' If your injury prevents you from adequately fulfilling the requirements of your current job , you are eligible to begin collecting benefits after the expiry of the elimination period .
Long term disability begins after satisfying the policy elimination period . Every policy is different . The elimination period describes the length of time you must be disabled and under the care of a physician , before benefit payments begin . You choose the elimination period at time of purchase . Short elimination periods have higher premiums , than longer elimination periods . Check your policy to determine what elimination period fit your budget .
I am not sure what you mean by `` functions '' . Disability insurance is designed to pay a percentage of your income , usually between 60 % and 80 % if you become disabled due to an injury or accident . You choose an elimination period which acts as a deductible . The elimination period is the period of time that goes by after you become disabled before the insurance begins to pay . The longer the elimination period the lower the premium . Each company has options as far as the elimination period , most common for Short Term disability might seven days sickness and zero days accident but this can vary according to circumstances . Short Term disability will provide income for the period of time specified in the policy , usually not more than a year or two , but again , that varies .
The terms of purchasing long term disability that you should be familiar with are these . Elimination period is the time between you are diagnosed by a doctor that you are medically disabled and the time you begin to receive benefits . The most common elimination periods are 30-60-90-180-360 days . The rule of thumb is the longer the elimination period the lower your premiums . Most good disability insurance carriers do go back and pay you from the first day of disability once the elimination period has been satisfied in a lump sum amount . Benefit period is another term to be familiar with as well . This is the period in which benefits will be paid to you once they commence . Common benefit periods are 2 years , 5 years , 10 years , 20 years or age 65 and 67 years old . I would recommend choosing the age versus years . If you are permanently disabled at a young age , you do not want to lose your benefits before becoming eligible for social security . The last term is future purchase options . This allows you to purchase more disability as your income increases without proof of insurability . In other words , you will not be reunderwritten . During your work life you will probably earn more money because of your increase knowledge and skills . This option allows you to insure that aspect .
The elimination period on disability insurance is the specified period from which the disability is medically diagnosed and the insured is eligible to start receiving benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower the premiums . On short term disability insurance plans elimination periods can be as little as days or weeks . On long term disability plans can vary from 30-45-60-90-180-360 days . Most good disability plans do go back to day one and pay the entire period once the elimination period has been met in a lump sum .
Just a quick note as I read another post and need to clarify an incorrect statement regarding elimination periods . YOU are NOT reimbursed for your choice of elimination period . If you choose a 60 day elimination period , your benefits start on the 61st day and payment is usually made on the 91st day and monthly there after . You are not compensated for your choice of elimination period . The elimination period is like choosing your deductible on your health , home or auto insurance . It is the time you are willing to self insure your situation . You are not compensated for your choice of elimination period . Your choice of elimination period effects your premiums .
Long Term Disability Insurance will start paying the benefit to the disabled employee after the waiting period -LRB- elimination period -RRB- has been satisfied . The most common elimination period chosen for Long Term Disability Insurance is 3 months , but it can be shorter or longer . The shorter the elimination period , the lower the premium . The countdown for the waiting period usually starts on the day of the injury or illness , but if a minor illness has developed into a major one , the elimination period might not start to be satisfied until that progression has taken place . Each policy will spell out that criteria to review ahead of time .
It depends on the carrier . Some carriers do not treat normal pregnancy as a sickness that keeps a woman from working and do not replace income during a normal pregnancy . However , to fully answer the question , request a `` specimen policy '' from the carrier you may beconsidering to find out the exact contract language aboutthe replacement of incomeduring pregnancy . Here is a typical treatment of normal pregnancy from a highly-reputable carrier for DI : `` If the Elimination Period for Your Disability Benefit is less than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are not covered Sicknesses . However , if the Elimination Period is equal to or greater than 90 days , then normal pregnancy and normal childbirth are covered Sicknesses subject to the definition of Disability . '' Now , one has to refer to this carrier 's specific definition of disability in the specimen policy : `` During the Your Occupation Period * you are not able to perform with reasonable continuity the substantial and material acts necessary to perform your occupation in the usual and customary way and you choose not to work at any occupation . After the Your Occupation Period You are not able to engage with reasonable continuity in any occupation in which you could reasonably be expected to perform satisfactorily in light of your age , education , training , experience , station in life , and physical and mental capacity . '' * Insurance-speak for the occupation you are in when you become disabled ; you pick the period of this part of the definition of disability when you apply , typically 2 years up to age-67 . The longer the your occupation period , the higher the premium . Thats because the risk to the company is higher to replace income for a longer period of time due to the fact that the choice to work in another position or not during this period is yours . The key to the question is : does your condition of pregnancy restrict you from working ? The insurance carrier will want to know that from your doctor before they will start the clock on the elimination period -LRB- 90 days -RRB- , after the fulfillment of which you will start to get income replacement checks . If you add a `` partial disability rider ' , usually at extra cost , you might not have to be `` totally '' unable to work in your occupation to get a pro-rated replacement of income as you work part-time . Again , refer to the specimen policy .
The elimination period for Disability Insurance is the waiting period between the time the disability occurs , and the time the insurance benefit begins to be paid . The elimination period is one of the variables of a Disability Insurance policy that can be adjusted to lower premiums -LRB- by making the elimination period longer -RRB- . If the applicant has very little savings on hand , they may want to pay more premium and buy a policy with a shorter elimination period .
This is a very common question and the answer is that it depends on the carrier and its definition of total disability . Normal pregnancy is not considered a disability by some carriers . In fact , it is clearly excluded from coverage in the contract . For others , as long as it falls into their definition of what constitutes a total disability , they will replace income after the elimination period is satisfied . The definition of disability is key . A typical definitionmight be something like `` the inability to perform the usual and customary duties of the occupation -LRB- job -RRB- in which the insured is working at the beginning of a disabling event ... '' A less favorable definition would add the words , `` and is unable to work in any other occupation . '' Since many women are able to performthe primary duties of their occupation during the first two trimesters of a normal pregnancy , some carriers do not automatically consider a leave for pregnancy a trigger point to replace income . And , if they do , 90 days is a typical elimination period - a kind of `` time deductible '' before one qualifies for benefits - most women would probably not satisfy the elimination period before the baby was born anyway . If there were complications resulting from pregnancy , then that 's a whole different situation , and if they started to occur early enough in the pregnancy and did qualify under the definition of disability , the elimination period would theoretically start sooner and benefits might be paid out before birth . If you are beginning a new job and think you might become pregnant or intend to become pregnant during the time you are employed with that company , be sure to ask Human Resources if the company provides disability insurance as a group benefit and if the coverage includes normal pregnancy .
When calculating your disability insurance amount you must take into account a few factors . The first factor is how much money you will need to draw every month in case of a total disability whether it is from an illness or an injury . Most plans will limit your maximum monthly benefit to 70 % of current income and most will reduce your benefit when you become eligible for SSI which is the federal disability program through the US government . Next factor to consider will be how long can you live without drawing a monthly benefit ? This is the elimination period . An elimination period can be 30-60-90-180-360 days before you begin to receive benefits . The longer the elimination period the lower your monthly premiums . If you find you need benefits in less time than 30 days , it may be necessary to purchase a short term disability plan as well as a long term disability plan . The last factor to consider is the benefit period or how long you need benefits to pay in case of a total disability . Benefit periods can be as short as 2 years or can reach out to age 67 years old with many options in between . I highly recommend using an independent experienced disability broker to help you build the proper coverage for your unique situation at the best price possible .
The elimination period in Disability Insurance is the period of time between becoming disabled and when benefits begin to be paid to the disabled employee . With Long Term Disability , a period of one to six months is usually selected as the elimination period . Generally , the shorter the elimination period , the higher the premium paid for the policy .
The elimination period is chosen at the time of application for the DI policy and represents a kind of `` time deductible '' that must be fulfilled before a claim is paid . The clock starts ticking when the carrier is informed in writing by a medical professional that the insured person has suffered a debilitating accident , developed a medical condition , or contracted a serious illness that is likely to last longer than the elimination period chosen . Thefirst dayof fulfillment of the elimination period typically begins at the date-of-onset of the debilitating event , although that actual date-of-onset is subject to the decision of the insurance company after reviewing medical records . Claims , i.e. a check for the maximum monthly benefit for income replacement , would usually not arrive until 30 days after the completion of the elimination period . For example , say the injured or sick insured has a 90-day elimination period . The income replacement check would arrive 30 days later , or 120 days from the date-of-onset . In the meantime , the insured would be responsible for paying bills during that four month period . So , serious discussion needs to take place at application time about how long of an elimination period should be applied for understanding that reality . The insured shouldmake sure that a liquid asset account be available at all times for such expenses , and/or a short-term DI policy should be in place , and/or a sufficient amount of sick leave and vacation be saved up , or a combination of all those accommodations .
What is elimination period in long term care insurance ? The elimination period is the amount of time you choose to self insure the situation before the long term care insurance kicks in to cover costs . The elimination period gives you options about how soon your long term care kicks in . The shorter the elimination period , the higher the premium . If you can extend your elimination period , usually you 'll see a considerable reduction in cost .
The elimination period for Disability Insurance is the amount of time between the event of becoming disabled , and the time when the benefit starts being received . People choose elimination periods based on their budget -LRB- the longer the elimination period , the lower the policy premium -RRB- and on the funds they have saved up -LRB- if someone does not have over one month of income in savings , it would be wise to get a Disability Insurance policy with a one month or less elimination period -RRB- .
I believe you are asking when the disability insurance benefits begin . All disability policies have a waiting period called the elimination period . This can be found on the declaration page in your policy . The elimination period is the period of time between a medical diagnosis of the disability and when benefits begin to pay to the insured . The most common elimination periods are 30-60-90-180-360 days .
The accumulation period in a disability insurance policy is the time frame during which your elimination period must be satisfied . E.g. . You have an elimination period of one month and an accumulation period of three months . You break your leg , are out of work a week ; go back to work for a month ; your leg is n't healing correctly ; you have to have surgery to reset it ; you are out of work for 3 weeks and not sure when you get to go back . At this point your Disability policy will start paying because you satisfied the one month elimination period during the three month accumulation period .
It really depends upon your waiting or elimination period . The most common elimination periods are 30-60-90-180-360 days . The time period must be met in order to start receiving your benefits . Once you have a medical diagnosis of a total disability is the day the time period starts . Almost all companies go back a pay a lump sum once the elimination period is met to the day of diagnosis . If you are applying for Social Security disability the minimum time period is 9 months and can be as long as 2 years .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
Does Comprehensive Auto Insurance Cover Vandalism ?
Yes , vandalism is one of the covered perils in the Comprehensive portion of most standard auto policies . Comprehensive is the more broadly defined of the two elements that make up the Physical Damage portion of a car insurance policy , the other element being Collision . Collision provides coverage for damages sustained by your car if involved in an accident with another motor vehicle , a stationary object or a human being . Comprehensive provides coverage for all other named perils including vandalism .
I 'm afraid you have confused what comprehensive insurance means . In regards to comprehensive insurance , `` comprehensive '' is a component of auto insurance , but not a type of insurance . comprehensive coverage protects your vehicle from losses that occur by means other than collision . Examples include theft , vandalism , weather damage , hitting a deer , etc. . As far as borrowing someone else 's vehicle , your auto insurance does n't cover you . Their insurance does . That is , auto insurance always follows the vehicle , not the driver .
If your car is the unfortunate victim of vandalism , will your current car insurance policy cover the claim ? The answer to this question depends on the type of auto insurance coverage you currently carry . If you only carry the minimum liability limits , the answer is no . However , if you carry comprehensive coverage , the answer is yes less any applicable annual deductible you have selected for your policy . Vandalism to your vehicle could include a variety of incidents ; key scratches , broken glass and other damage caused with malicious intent . Vandalism is different than burglary . If something was removed from your vehicle as a result of the vandalism , you must be sure to state this in your report . In most cases , comprehensive coverage will cover both theft and vandalism . The amount of coverage your policy offers depends not only on the overall type of policy you have selected , but the coverage limits , the type of claim , and your chosen annual deductible . In the case of high deductible policies , it may be more beneficial to pay for the repairs out of pocket than to run it through your insurance company . Before any claim will be paid , you must file a report with your local police department describing the nature of the vandalism .
Auto glass is covered on an auto insurance policy as long as you carry physical damage coverage . Physical damage coverage would be comprehensive or collision . If the car is in an accident and the glass is broken collision would pick up the damage minus yourcollisiondeductible . If the damage came from a non collision related incident such as a rock hitting thewindshieldor vandalism for example these types of situations would fall under comprehensive coverage . Many insurance carriers now offer zero -LRB- 0 -RRB- deductible for glass on the comprehensive deductible . For example : you could purchase a $ 500.00 deductiblefor any comprehensive loss on your auto policy but have a zero -LRB- 0 -RRB- deductible if the comprehensive loss was glass . Usually a slight extra premium applies for this coverage . Talk to your local agent to see if this is an option available in your area .
It can . Vandalism is covered under comprehensive which is one of two types of coverage that can be included under physical damage on your auto policy . The other coverage that protects your actual vehicle is collision . Comprehensive and collision are required when you have a loan but are optional when you do n't . These two coverages provide protection for the car itself if it gets damaged and typically requires that you pay a deductible first before the insurance company responds . Typically , collision covers anything you collide or have an upset with while comprehensive covers everything else including fire , theft , and vandalism .
Vandalism to a vehicle is typically covered under the comprehensive portion of your car insurance . Fire , theft and vandalism are three of the biggest components of the comprehensive section of your policy . Usually , the deductible is considerably lower than your collision deductible . Vandalism is covered under your homeowner 's insurance policy , although it would apply to contents of your home , the dwelling and other structures . Vandalism to personal property inside a vehicle would be a different type of claim than the vehicle itself .
Renters insurance covers your personal contents of your rented property . If you vehicle was vandalized that is a comprehensive claim under your auto insurance , assuming that you carry comprehensive coverage . If you do not carry comprehensive they only thing to do is sue the person who vandalized your car , and most likly you do not know who they are . Sorry about your misfortune and best of luck to you .
Yes , vandalism is one of the covered perils in the Comprehensive portion of most standard auto policies . Comprehensive is the more broadly defined of the two elements that make up the Physical Damage portion of a car insurance policy , the other element being Collision . Collision provides coverage for damages sustained by your car if involved in an accident with another motor vehicle , a stationary object or a human being . Comprehensive provides coverage for all other named perils including vandalism .
Comprehensive is a coverage of your insurance . Comprehensive means other then collision . So in other words if your auto is damaged from a non collision event and you carry comprehensive coverage on your auto policy you would be covered for the damage minus your deductible . Such claims include , theft , vandalism , glass breakage , falling objects to name a few . The key is to remember other then collision . If you hit something or if something or someone hits you this is collision .
Comprehensive coverage applies to damage to your vehicle for anything other than a collision . Some examples would be hail damage , animal strikes , windshield breakage , or vandalism . Auto insurance is divided into the Liability portion and the damage to your auto portion . Liability is what many states require and what you need to drive another car . Collision and Comprehensive may cover another car only in certain circumstances such as temporarily renting a vehicle . Usually to have Comprehensive coverage you would also have liability coverage as well unless you are storing your vehicl . If you are going to drive the vehicle or any vehicle you need to carry liability .
Yes , your Comprehensive coverage covers any animal strike , falling trees , rocks , vandalism , anything other than a collision . Since an animal is not considered an inanimate object , an animal strike is covered under the comprehensive portion of your auto policy . Collision covers a collision with trees , other auto 's or other vehicles , and other inanimate objects .
Comprehensive auto insurance typically refers to a vehicle that is insured with liability . collision and comprehensive benefits . You can select different deductibles for your collision and comprehensive coverage . The `` comprehensive '' portion of your policy refers to claims `` other than collision '' such as fire and theft , vandalism , glass breakage etc. . . Often , no or a small deductible applies .
Auto insurance is not a maintenance contract and does not cover any type of auto repair not caused by an accident . Auto insurance covers liability if you are sued , medical payments for persons in your car , protection from uninsured drivers , and if you have full coverage it will cover collision damages and under the comprehensive , glass , vandalism , and any loss other than collision caused by an accidental occurrence .
Falling objects whether they are trees , airplane parts , stones from a gravel truck or something else are covered under comprehensive . Comprehensive covers the physical damage of your vehicle for everything except collision . Fire , theft , vandalism , as well as chipped windshields are a typical comprehensive claim . Comprehensive which is an optional coverage since it covers your vehicle usually has a deductible . Once you satisfy the deductible the insurance company pays the rest . It can be frustrating to pay the deductible when you have n't done anything wrong . If the damage was caused by someone who was negligent , let your insurance company know so that they can subrogate for your deductible as well as what they paid out . The age of the tree does n't matter , but the condition might especially if you have proof that the owner knew .
Your auto insurance will cover a falling tree on your car under the comprehensive coverage 's minus your deductible . If you carry comprehensive coverage on your vehicle then your covered . Comprehensive coverage includes all non collision physical damages that may occur to your vehicle . Examples are falling or flying objects , fire , theft , vandalism , glass breakage .
Auto insurance will cover cracked windshield under yourcomprehensivecoverage portion of your auto insurance policy minus your deductible . They type ofoccurrencescovered by comprehensive would befallingobjects , flying objects , -LRB- rock being the most common -RRB- vandalism , temperature changes . Discuss with your local agent about comprehensivecoverageand deductible optionsavailable to you . Comprehensive may have a zero deductible glass option .
Another name for comprehensive coverage is other then collision . If you hit someone or some object or someone hits you this is collision . If not in this category then the coverage is comprehensive . The exception is striking an animal . Since there is no way to control an animal jumping out in front of a moving vehicle this is classified as comprehensive . Most common comprehensive claims are glass breakage from a rock , vandalism , theft , falling objects such as a tree , flood , earthquake , fire . Consult your local agent for more specifics on comprehensive coverage .
Vandalism to a car is not typically covered under a homeowners insurance policy . If you wish to have vandalism coverage for your automobile then you need to purchase comprehensive coverage from your auto insurance carrier . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverages provided by your policy and any exclusions that may be contained within the policy .
Vandalism is covered by the comprehensive portion of your automobile policy . This coverage is not required by state law . Check your own policy to see if you have purchased this coverage . The claim under the comprehensive portion of the policy is subject to a deductible but the insurance company will attempt to return the automobile to the state it was in prior to the incident . Because certain groups of people are more subject to vandalism than others , for example , teachers , peace officers and politicians some companies alter their adjusting procedures to either eliminate or reduce the deductible on those specific professions . Check with your insurance agent to see if you qualify for such a reduction .
The portion of an auto policy that covers damage caused by hitting a deer is the `` Comprehensive '' portion of the physical damage coverage . Physical damage coverage for your car is divided into two portions : Collision and Comprehensive . Collision is the more narrowly defined of the two and provides coverage if your car is damaged as a result of hitting another car , a stationary object or a human.Comprehensive covers everything else , for example , a deer strike , vandalism , somethig falling on it while parked , etc. .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Which Home Insurance Covers Flood ?
No homeowners insurance will cover flood . This is not to be mistaken with water damage that may occur from a broken pipe in the home or possible overflow from a dishwasher or washing machine . These type of things will be covered if you have a special form HO3 policy . But an actual flood caused by rising water is always excluded and you would need to purchase a flood policy .
All homeowner 's policies exclude flood insurance . A separate policy must be purchased -LRB- which is a flood policy . -RRB- You can contact a local independent agent who can provide a quote for you . They should be able to provide a quote using your home address . Good luck . Best , Josh DeBoer jdeboer@fdands.com fdands.com
Flood damage is a standard exclusion found in all Homeowners policies . Unlike coverage for earth movement , or some limited coverage for water damage caused by the backup or failure of a sewer or drain system , which can be endorsed into the policy , the only way to obtain comprehensive coverage for flood damage is by purchasing a separate Flood Insurance policy .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
Flood insurance or coverage for a flood is not included in a homeowners insurance policy and is in fact specifically excluded . There is only one option for flood protection and that is to purchase a flood policy . Almost all insurance companies can write you a flood policy but the policy is underwritten though FEMA . Which ever insurance company you currently work with on your homeowners insurance should be able to set you up with a flood policy . Unless there is a close of escrow you have a 30 day wait before a flood policy can become active so no waiting until the storm hits to purchase a flood policy . Flood is not to be mixed up with water damage which is covered under a homeowners policy . An example of water damage would be a pipe that burst in the home .
Flood damage is excluded on just about every home , condo and renters policy . In order to have coverage for flood damage you need flood insurance which is a separate policy . The cost for flood insurance depends on your area and flood zone . FEMA regulates flood insurance so rates are the same with all companies who service flood insurance .
Most insurance companies that offer homeowners policies use or adapt a standard policy that was developed by the Insurance Services Organization -LRB- ISO -RRB- . Definitions are fairly consistent across different company policies . Companies have frequently adopted easy read policies and some of these appear to be slightly different ; however , they are still based upon the same framework in most cases . The mix of coverages offered by the various insurance companies is also comparable . The ISO format allows for a number of different forms and that can sometimes create confusion but most companies offer the standard HO-3 form . The most important thing is to determine the perils that the policy is pledged to insure against . Again , these are fairly standard but with the different forms there is also a slightly different list of perils . The basic peril is fire and the list of perils includes everything except . As a consumer you should note carefully the perils that the policy is going to cover . Customers occasionally fail to make premium payments when they are required and the coverage lapses . Expired home insurance is the very worst kind . It will not provide any coverage in the event of loss which could be quite expensive . The majority of home policies are actually paid by an impound account established by the mortgage company but some are not and occasionally even a mortgage company fails to pay the premium at the correct time . Incidentally , since the mortgage company requires that you carry home insurance and name them as mortgagee they also have the right to issue an insurance policy on the property with a company that you do not select and at a price you do not negotiate . This can be a rude and expensive revelation . So , the best home insurance policy is the one that is in effect . The next criteria are that the best home insurance has adequate limits to handle a claim . Usually this is established at the time the policy is written with a third-party estimate of reconstruction costs . Most home policies have a provision that increases coverage with every renewal to keep pace with the rising cost of construction in your area . This should be checked every few years to make sure that everything is accurate . The cost of a property loss could greater than anticipated . If there is a massive loss in an area , for example a fire takes out homes in a three block area , the limits of the policy might be exhausted before the home can be restored because there would be an unusual strain on the capacity of the building trades in the area to repair all the homes involved . There is intense competition for building materials and specialty contractors . If you think you might be in an area that could be affected in that way make sure you discuss this at length with your insurance agent . The liability limit on your home policy requires close attention . A lawsuit for bodily injury or physical damage can end up costing a great deal more than the value of your home . You should select the maximum amount of liability coverage that the insurance company offers and then price umbrella coverage to increase that limit . It only takes one lawsuit to ruin your weekend . Two huge risks are not covered by the standard home insurance policy . These risks are flood and earthquake . Both can be devastating . Consider the purchase of flood insurance through your agent and the National Flood program and Earthquake which is available as a separate policy or as optional coverage depending upon your insurance company . There are four optional coverages that also require close attention . There are additional coverages available but your agent will probably be able to identify your need based upon your location . If your sewer backs up and destroys your hardwood floors , carpets , tile , walls and woodwork , you will be surprised that that damage is excluded by most home insurance policies . Coverage for this risk is available through your home insurance company . Since most losses to the residence itself are partial losses repair and replacement can be hampered by a change in laws and ordinances concerning construction in your area . There is additional coverage available to pay for those increased expenses . Home insurance policies do not cover all personal property in the same way . There are specific limits to coverage for jewelry , guns , collections and others . Review this coverage and obtain additional coverage if you have an exposure in these areas . The coverage for the contents in a home is rarely set up as replacement coverage . That means that a loss is going to be adjusted by the price of used furniture , clothing and appliances . This is not satisfactory in most cases . There is optional coverage that will replace personal property based upon the actual price of replacement items . Many people think that home insurance is just a simple matter , however , it can be quite complex , particularly when you have a loss .
Generally speaking NO ... virtually all carriers who use any part of an ISO homeowners insurance contract will exclude flood . Flood insurance is underwritten and priced by the government through FEMA . There are several carriers who write flood insurance and there should n't be any real variance to the pricing between the carriers . Even if you do n't think your home or business would ever flood , check out the cost of flood insurance . You might be surprised how cheap it actually is ... I know what I 'm talking about on this topic . My office had 7 feet of water in it after back to back 100 years storms hit my area back in 2010 . I did n't have flood insurance -LRB- dumb agent I know -RRB- and had to come out of pocket to rebuild my unit . I have flood insurance now ... costs me about $ 350 a year !!
Home Owners Insurance DOES NOT COVER FLOODING . Depending what `` flood plain your home is located you can purchase flood insurance reasonably or if you are in a high risk area for flooding your vacation plans may have to be changed . Under no circumstances should you be assuming this risk and please also remember EARTHQUAKE DAMAGE IS NOT COVERED BY HOMEOWNERS
NOTHING ! So good question . Flood is outside ground water entering your home through windows and doors , NOT seepage thru cracks or failure of the sump pump . Flood damage is covered only with a flood insurance policy and coverage for flood damage to any area of the home is very limited . Seepage is not going to be covered at all . And coverage for water damage due to sump pump failure is not typically an automatic coverage on homeowners insurance but usually an available option . Talk to you insurance professional , he/she can help .
Insurance covers specified perils . Water damage is the result of an event . Everything depends upon what caused the water damage . If the damage is caused by the sudden rupture of water pipes inside the home , the damage is covered by most homeowners policies . If the damage is caused by the overflow of a toilet , the loss would be excluded by most homeowners policies . Incidentally , many insurance companies will provide coverage for the overflowing of a toilet if an extension to coverage is purchased at an increased premium . If the loss is caused by water enter the house from outside it is most likely not going to be covered . Flood insurance , an additional insurance policy is required to cover this type of loss . While it is true that flood damage is not always clear cut , it is important to note that almost one quarter of all property claims involve flood damage in the United States . The purchase of a flood policy is a wise move regardless of where you are located . I have seen desert towns inundated as well as mountain communities . In some places flooding is common .
This really depends on a few factors . First , was this a sudden and accidental occurrence or did it happen over time ? Secondly , did the water enter from outside your home or did it come from inside ? Lastly , do you have coverage for water/sewer backup ? Many companies will offer this as an option . If the water enters from outside your home , the insurance company will treat this the same as a flood , which will not be covered unless you have flood insurance . The only exception to this rule is if it backs up through your sewer or sump AND you have water/sewer backup coverage on your policy . This still must be sudden and accidental such as during a period of heavy rain . If the water is slowly seeping through the walls or floor , they will not cover this as it 's deemed a maintenance problem , not an occurrence . If the water comes from inside your home , such as a burst pipe , they will normally cover the damage it causes . Water claims have become very common and insurance companies are paying much more attention to them to make sure they should be covering them . Your homeowners policy is intended to protect you from the sudden and accidental . Many people seem to think that it 's an excuse to avoid maintaining their homes . To avoid any problems at claim time , be sure your home is maintained , it will cost you a lot less in the long run .
Homeowners policies contain a specific exclusion for the peril `` Flood '' . Flood is defined as , `` A flood is a general and temporary condition where two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties are inundated by water or mudflow . '' Maybe people confuse `` flood '' as a peril as compared to `` flooding '' of a basement or floor . If , for example , a pipe were to burst and `` flood '' the basement that would be a covered loss under a Standard HO-3 Homeowners Insurance Policy . It would cover the damage to the dwelling and your contents but not the cost to replace the pipe itself . Hope this helps
To have flood covered by any type of renters or homeowners coverage , you must have a special flood policy . Your homeowners and renters will cover water damage due to sewer backup , burst pipes , or rain damage from a leaking roof , it will not cover flood . There is a special Federal Flood Insurance program you can look in to if you live in a flood zone .
Mortgage companies require that you obtain and maintain acceptable Homeowners Insurance as one of the conditions of approving you for your home loan . In their case , it is to be sure that THEIR interest in your home is protected from loss caused by a covered peril . In some cases , If your home is located in a higher risk flood zone , they will extend that requirement to include Flood Insurance as well . When you are fortunate enough to pay off your mortgage , this should not be an event that makes you to consider cancelling your Homeowners ' and Flood Insurance policies , however . The mortage cmpany no longer has an interest in the security of your home but you and your family certainly do .
Great question ! Homeowners insurance typically covers the home , as well as the contents , and your liability for accidents on your property . Hazard insurance only covers the home itself , and not the contents . Let 's say that you had purchased a lot , and were building a home on it . Hazard policies would cover the replacement of the home-in-progress , should it be damaged or destroyed in a fire or natural disaster . Many landlords will use this type of policy , and it is also often bundled into a homeowners policy . A word of warning - look specifically to see if damage from flooding is excluded , especially if your home is in a floodplain , or prone to flooding . Thanks for asking !
Approximately 25 % of the property damage annually in the USA is flood related . Most homeowners policies exclude damage caused by flood . Many of these companies work with the federal flood insurance program administered by FEMA . Many lenders require flood insurance , particularly if the home is in a flood plain .
A homeowners policy doesnt cover any loss for property inside a structure that is caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water which enter the house through an opening not made by the direct force of the wind or hail . That means that you really need a flood policy . 25 % of property losses in the USA are the result of flood . The problem is so great that insurance is underwritten by the Federal Government . Agents generally , have access to flood coverage for your home and many companies will discount your homeowners policy if you have a valid flood policy .
If this question is referring to flood as in rising water then a homeowners policy will not cover flood damage . Only a flood policy will give you this coverage . If the so called flood was just a bursting pipe in the home then this type of loss would be covered by your homeowners policy .
Protection for loss as the result of flood is often overlooked . Nearly 25 % or all property claims are flood claims . Many people can not visualize a flood and yet I have seen flooding in very unusual places . When persistent rain caused mudslides in Marin California , storm drained were plugged with debris and nearby homes were flooded , even in the mountains .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Anyone Have Life Insurance On Me ?
If anyone had life insurance on you , you would probably know it , because you need to give your consent for someone to take out life insurance on you . However , if you were a child when the policy was purchased , there might be a policy on your life that you do n't know about , most likely owned by your parents .
This question can not be answered by anyone execpt the insurance companies underwriters and their managers . Auto insurance is rated on numerous factors : what city the car is kept in , what safety features does the car have , what offenses are on your driving record , your age and etc. . This is just a few rating factors insurance companies consider . Then , to make this more complicated , each factor has its own weight within a given insurance company . For example , I live in Michigan and have a not at fault accident on my record . A regional insurance carrier counts that against me to increase my premium cost and price me out of its market . A national carrier , on the other hand , does not count the accident against me , whichmakes my premium muchlower . In summary , it really depends upon your insurance carrier . My best advice is to contact your agent and have him ask how this will effect the renewal rate -LRB- keep in mind your insurance carrier might issue a non-renewal because of your DWI -RRB- . If it will go up considerably you might want to consider shopping around .
Being a health insurance broker is a extreamly difficult undertaking . The two markets that you will want to consider are the individual and the group markets . It is far more difficult to learn the group market because of the many IRC and federal regulations that come into play . There is no one path to becoming a knowledgable and trusted broker although I do recomend that anyone atempting to undertake such a career put in many months of intense study . Continuing education courses are great sources for indepth information about different aspects of the health insurance world such as HSA 's , FSA 's , systems of managed care , HDHP 's , self-funding , regulatory considerations , etc. . . Another wonderful resource that I view as manditory reading for anyone interested in brokering any employee benefts would be `` The Handbook of Employee Benefits '' by Jerry S. Rosenbloom , it is as close to a brokers bible as I have found . I would be happy to discuss this in more detail if you like ... Feel free to email me or give me a call sometime , - Christopher Lawrence 609-453-4359 Christopher@Lawrence-Financial-Consulting.com
The easy answer for this would be `` Anyone you give permission to drive your vehicle . '' The exception to this would be anyone who is specifically excluded from your insurance policy . For example , a client of mine has a 17 year old son . Their son had a valid learners permit and went through the process of completing Drivers Ed , but never took the final exam and was never issued a license . Even though his permit has expired , based on his age and the fact that he had a permit , I recommended to my client they included him on their policy , but list him as an excluded driver . Because he is excluded , the insurance company does not rate him on the policy , and the premium did not increase . Outside of their son , anyone they give permission to drive their car would be covered , even if the person who borrowed the vehicle did not have their own insurance policy . You do run the risk of increased monthly premium payments should an uninsured driver borrow your car with your permission and be involved in an accident where they are liable however . So be careful of who and how often you do lend your vehicle out .
No - You can name ME as your beneficiary ... . hehehe In order to buy life insurance on someone , you have to have an `` insurable interest '' ... I ca n't buy life insurance on just anyone . There has to be a connection that would harm you financially should the person pass away . Examples are your spouse , kids , other family if you have a financial interest in something together , a business partner , someone you loaned $ $ to , etc. . I bring up insurable interest because in these cases , you , or someone else facing a financial loss due to the persons death , has to be the beneficiary . Now ... if you buy life insurance on yourself , you can pretty much name any person or legal entity as the beneficiary . Leave the funds to a spouse , kids , your favorite non-profit , or to me ... Ok . Not me . So the answer of `` who can be the beneficiary '' all depends on who the insured is , the owner of the policy , and what the connection between everyone involved . have more questions -- Reach out ! - gravy
Anyone can use an annuity . If you 're asking who is most likely to benefit most from an annuity that answer would be anyone who needs a stable , predictable , and reliable income stream . Another type of person who benefits from owning an annuity is anyone who believes they will live a long time as annuities can provide income that lasts for ones lifetime even if the income stream is more than the initial money in the annuity .
Why should anyone buy life insurance on a newborn baby ? That 's probably the 1st question anyone would ask when the subject is brought up . I can think of a couple good reasons right off the top of my head . 1 -RRB- should the baby die the last thing anyone would want would be to have the costs of a funeral added to the burden of grief ! 2 -RRB- Whole life insurance is a really great way to begin a savings fund for the child that will grow tax-free and at a much faster rate than any savings , CD or money market account . And the money can be available for college funding or a first car when the time comes !
This debate has been going on for the last century . In theory , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having health insurance ? And , in theory , if everyone was in the insurance risk pool this would be the best way to spread health care costs equally . By the same token , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having good and ample food & water , and everyone needs housing , and everyone needs utilities for their housing , and everyone needs transportation and there is a long list of other needs that we all have . The real question is can a society afford universal health insurance and thus universal health care in the sense that most Americans have become accustomed to getting it ? When you start looking at the economics of health care this becomes much more problematic . Health care is different from most services we consume in that it creates its own growing demand . Who does n't want to live longer , and live healthier during that longer life ? And , as you have probably noticed , we have a continually growing list of parts we can replace , once deadly illnesses we can now manage or cure , and treatments that just improve your `` quality of life '' . All this comes with a price tag and the price just keeps going up . I was born in 1957 for a cost of $ 400 , my son was born in 1987 for a cost of $ 4000 , and today a normal childbirth is easily $ 8000 + . As best as I can tell , babies are born the same way today as they were in 1957 but the cost has far outpaced general inflation levels in the economy as a whole over that time period . The painful reality is that providing universal healthcare in a modern society -LRB- e , g , - North America , Europe -RRB- has not been accomplished without rationing of healthcare services -LRB- however it might be disguised -RRB- . For instance , we have more MRI scanners in Memphis , TN than in all of Canada -LRB- a nation often cited as an example of where universal health insurance is a success -RRB- . Tests that get ordered and conducted on the same day here can have waiting times of months up there . There really is no definitive answer to your question . But it does highlight the gap between theory and reality when trying to address providing health insurance to a population .
The simplest way to think ofhealth insurance exchanges is think of them like a Walmart , Target , Cosco , Kroger , etc. or even more similar - Amazon.com.Thehealth exchange is an online place to shop for health insurance , where insurance companies -LRB- like Blue Cross , Humana , UnitedOne , etc -RRB- can elect to have their health plans available for enrollmentSome states have their own exchanges in which they received federal dollars to operate , while other states opted for the federal government to handle the exchange through healthcare.gov . Just as anyone can walk into a Walmart or log on to Amazon.com , anyone can log on to an exchange and shop for health insurance . The plans on the exchange may be limited in the number of doctors & hospitals in the network in order to save premium dollars . For example , in TN , BCBS launched their `` E '' network , which has roughly 5000 providers state wide , where their other networks have ~ 45,000 & ~ 55,000 providers . The premiums for the `` E '' network are significantly lower . An insurance company may have addition plans available if you purchase directly through them . This is typically called off-marketplace , while enrolling through the exchange is on-marketplace . So ... if you had more choices off-marketplace , why would anyone want to enroll in a plan through the marketplace/health insurance exchange ? You can only obtain the government premium subsidy through the exchange . In other words , depending on your income , you could pay less through the marketplace . When you register , for example at healthcare.gov , there will be an opportunity for you to input your income from the previous year . If you are under 400 % -LRB- about $ 44k for individual -RRB- you could qualify for the subsidy , reducing the premium you would have to pay for your plan . After the insurance company receives your part of the payment , the insurance company tells the government you have paid & then the government pays the subsidy , so you get immediate relief . One final thought ... open enrollment ended 03/31 , so unless you have lost coverage involuntarily or had another qualifying event , you would be ineligible to enroll in individual health insurance until the next open enrollment .
Is variable universal life worth it ? It 's going to depend on the individual who purchases it . Variable Universal Life has many `` moving parts '' that require attention . This is not a purchase and put in the drawer policy . It requires `` management '' by the individual who purchases it . These policies may require rebalancing and/or changing funding options within the choices . Anyone who purchases a VUL should have a good understanding of investment risk and what it requires for the best possible outcome . For me personally , I am not a fan of VUL as I feel some things in a portfolio should be boring , safe and consistent and offer a reasonable return . I feel traditional old fashioned whole life offers that to an individual . It becomes a personal question of how much RISK a person should have . For me , my whole life respresents a boring financial product , one that did ` nt go backwards in 2008 , when all my exciting ones did . Personally , I want something that is steady , along with something else that has more risk but greater return possibilities . Again personally speaking , I do n't feel insurance should ever be an `` at risk '' product . Just me , old school , sorry .
The easy answer is `` anyone who will pass away , and does n't have a ton of cash laying around to cover funeral expenses and provide for those they leave behind '' . If you are n't in that category , then it might be best to look into it . The truth is that unfortunately , too many people are uncomfortable thinking about death , and so avoid the planning for what happens when they do . The result is financial stress on the spouse/immediate family ; emotional stress for the family when the hat is passed around to help collect for the costs , and the real strain of trying to live without an income , and the drastic lifestyle changes that causes . That sounds harsh , and it is , but it is becoming more and more common as incomes dwindle and families struggle . Please consider the importance of protecting those you love from this reality . Please hit the `` contact me '' button , and let me help you with your questions .
We have life insurance because we love . If there is anyone that would suffer at your passing , life insurance could ease the pain and assist in the transition . We need life insurance because we borrow money . Lenders often ask customers to assign life insurance benefits to secure a loan . We need life insurance if we want to leave a lasting impression on society . If there is a charity that excites you , a gift at your passing might be a significant boost to their activities . If you dont love anyone , dont owe anything and could care less about society , you are probably not a candidate for life insurance .
Yes , it will cover anyone hurt on your property if you are sued . That being said , you should make sure that anyone who does work on your property has there own insurance . A reputable contractor usually is covered by workman 's compensation if his employees are hurt while on the job .
Anyone who has someone relying on them for financial support should have Disability Insurance . Becoming disabled for a period of time is not uncommon , and it can happen at any age . Very few families can get by on one income , and even single persons can lose their life 's savings through an extended disability . Becoming disabled generally does not just take away income for a period of months or years , it comes with medical bills and other extra expenses connected to the cause of disability . That is why anyone who makes and relies on making an income should buy Disability Insurance , in my opinion .
You can ask your parents or grandparents . If they do not have life insurance on you , and you have not signed an application as the Insured for anyone else , it is doubtful that anyone has a policy on you . Life insurance requires the consent of the insured person , if the Insured is an adult . And that consent nearly always requires that the Insured signs the application .
Life insurance should be owned by anyone with a family or business , which has any current financial liabilities , future obligations or wants to make a difference through legacy or charitable giving . Permanent life insurance should be owned by anyone who is seeking tax advantaged supplemental retirement income that has a long term commitment to keep the permanent life insurance policy in force for the life of the insured .
You may have already gotten this resolved but since I have not seen anyone respond to this I thought I would put in my 2 cents worth . Everything you mention makes sense to me . When the company switched the accounts to the guaranteed fund the only way to switch it back would be to notify the company , usually with a company allocation form identifying the new allocations . What troubles me is that from what you are saying , there is no notification of the process . My best guess is there is something in the small print you have which talks about the process but without seeing any of this I can not directly help -LRB- there are no attachments on this venue -RRB- . I would recommend finding a broker and see if they know what the process is specifically with the company the policy is with .
The reasons that an `` expecting parent '' should implement Life Insurance are the same as for anyone who wants to leave an inheritance to an heir . Whole Life Insurance , in my opinion , is the only type of policy one should consider in that case and one of the main reasons is because Whole Life truly does create an estate for the benefit of heirs of the insured . Additionally Whole Life can also supplement Retirement income for the owner while also providing a cash benefit to the heirs . Another reason for getting a whole life policy when expecting a family is to be able to provide money for the children 's higher education ie tuition . And there are many other reasons as well ! If you would like more information and advise please contact me !
An insurance policy is a legal contract . A legal contract always requires consideration . That means money must change hands . I could promise you a free trip to the moon but if you dont pay me anything the most you could sue me for would be breach of promise . You couldnt say I broke a contract even if my promise was in writing . Insurance is based on the idea that the premium is paid prior to the start of coverage . I doubt you will find anyone that will truly provide insurance without a down-payment and if you do , check to make sure you arent taking out a loan to do so .
Retail Costs : Urgent Care and Labs $ 217 ER Visit $ 1115 Drugs -LRB- steroid -RRB- $ 28 Radiology -LRB- chest X-ray -RRB- $ 152 Radiologist -LRB- to read chest X-ray -RRB- $ 54 Respiratory -LRB- nebulizer -RRB- $ 92 Take home prescriptions $ 76.06 -LRB- $ 45 was for the eye drop that I didnt have a sample of , darn ! -RRB- Total cost to be sick : $ 1734.06 Now , even though we have a high deductible and everything applies to that , I dont have to pay this cost out of pocket . Because the providers we used accept assignment , our insurance company sets a cap on how much they will pay for a service . Because of that , we get a discounted rate , which lowers the cost to $ 1308.51 , almost a 25 % discount . Whether you agree or not , those are the rules . Since we will pay with HSA money , this will also save about another $ 327 in taxes . If you have to pay any out of pocket costs for health care services or medicines , I strongly suggest looking into this type plan . What if You Dont Have Insurance ? If you dont have insurance , you could be looking at full price . I know for a fact that our hospital offers a 30 % discount if you pay all at once with a cash or a check . They also set up payment plans , but you lose the discount and get a penalty if you miss a payment . Not all hospitals will work with patients , so you could be forced to use credit or get sent to collections if you cant pay . This amount is not likely to bankrupt anyone , but what if my daughter had been admitted for pneumonia or something worse ? I think going without health insurance is just too much of a risk . Finally , it really makes me mad when I have to admit that I thought about costs and money before taking my sick kid to the emergency room . Honestly , I would have probably done the same thing , even if I knew it would have been $ 5000 or $ 10,000 , but how many people have to weigh getting needed health care with how much money they have in the bank ? I dont have an answer , but Im repeatedly reminded about the crazy cost of health care in the US , and right now , Id rather my tax dollars go toward some sort of solution rather than funding things that do me no good .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
How Much Is Renters Insurance From Allstate ?
Renters insurance coverage from Allstate depends on a number of different factors . Of course , the amount of coverage on your personal contents is one of the biggest variables along with what other limits you elect . Where you live and what type of claims history may also play a role in the rate . A licensed Allstate broker can provide the exact rate ... probably in the $ 100 - $ 300 per year range .
How a renters policy is rated is no different than how any other homeowners policy is rented . There are several factors that go into the rating mechanism : Where you live - how far to the nearest fire station and fire hydrant The construction of the building - is it a brick building or a frame building -LRB- which do you think burns easier ? -RRB- Safety features - smoke alarms , deadbolt locks , fire/burglar alarms , sprinklers Your personal Property limit -LRB- your stuff -RRB- - the higher the values , the higher the premium Your personal Liability Limit - again , higher limits , higher premium Personal circumstances - age , credit score , claims history Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without building coverage . It 's coverage for you and your stuff . The cost of renters insurance is usually much lower than a homeowners policy because a lot of the premium is generated by the cost of the building . Some guidelines to get the right renters coverage . Get a good handle on what it would cost to replace your stuff . A good agent can help or you can go to Allstate 's website and use their tool -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Secondly , choose a higher liability limit . I usually quote at least $ 300,000 but prefer $ 500,000 or more . The cost is very negligible . Be smart , find an agent you can trust and take their advice . If you do have a claim , you 'll be happy you did .
We 've all heard the radio commercial `` get renters insurance for $ 4/month '' . How does this apply to you ? Can you really get renters insurance for $ 4/month ? Probably , but is it right for you ? Probably not . A renters policy is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . This is coverage for your `` stuff '' as well as your liability . There are a few things to keep in mind to be sure you 're getting what you need , not just whatever 's least expensive . Discounts are great but I 've never had a client that thanked me for a discount after they had a claim . Here are some things to keep in mind when choosing your renters coverage : Personal Property -LRB- your Stuff -RRB- - there are two ways an insurance company can settle your claim , Actual Cash Value -LRB- depreciated value -RRB- , or Replacement Cost . With ACV they 'll estimate what your stuff is worth and write you a check up to the policy limit . With replacement cost they 'll replace your stuff with new up to the policy limit . It 's important to get a good estimate of what your stuff is worth so , at claim time , you know what to expect . There are some good tools to estimate this . Your agent should have a guide from Marshall Swift/Beockh that estimates based on square footage or room count . The other tool is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- , WEBSITELINK However you choose to estimate it , make sure you have some method . Also , I wo n't sell a renters policy on an ACV basis , it 's too uncertain . Personal Liability - This covers you if your sued for someone gets hurt on your property or if you hurt someone or cause damage . My recommendation is that higher is better . I will not go lower than $ 300,000 and usually will recommend at least $ 500,000 . The premium difference is tiny . Loss of Use - This often glossed over coverage is one of the hidden gems in your renters policy . If your rental home or apartment is damaged and you ca n't stay there , you 're insurance company will pay any extra costs you incur to stay at a temporary residence while your home is being rebuilt . This is a great coverage that nobody talks about . It 's usually a percentage of your contents limit and will pay for up to 12 months . So , in my opinion , the Best renters policy is one that has a high enough limit to cover all your stuff at replacement cost , has a high enough liability limit to protect you against a lawsuit , and has loss of use coverage . $ 4/month ? Probably not , but it 's not as expensive as you think . Find a good agent and they 'll help you put together the right coverage for you .
You may think that , because you do n't own a home , you do n't have anything at risk . Nothing could be further from the truth . The only difference between a homeowner and a renter is that a renter does n't own a building . You still have personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- and you still have a liability exposure . A renters policy is just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It will cover your stuff if it 's stolen or damaged in a fire , just like a homeowners policy will . If someone gets hurt in your home , it will cover you just like a homeowners policy will . Now , be smart insure yourself properly . You 'd be surprised how much it would cost to replace all your stuff . A good agent will help you choose the right limit . You can even estimate it yourself . Allstate has a great tool on their website to help you estimate what your stuff would cost to replace -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Notice I said `` replace '' . This is an important distinction . if your stuff is damaged , it can be replaced with new , not depreciated . Be sure to ask for replacement cost coverage on your personal property . Next , pick the right liability limit . Be sure it 's high enough to protect all your assets . Do n't skimp here . Liability coverage pays if you are deemed negligent and these lawsuits are seldom small and higher limits are extremely inexpensive . Be smart and find an agent you can trust . If it costs a little more , pay it . Choose your agent first , then listen to him/her . In the long run , you 'll save money .
Most reputable companies offer renters insurance and it 's very reasonably priced . Call your agent who handles your auto insurance and they should be able to help you . And , if they use the same company for your renters , you should get discounts off of both saving you quite a bit of money . Here are some things to consider : Renters insurance is really just a homeowners policy without the building coverage . It covers your personal property -LRB- stuff -RRB- , and your liability . Two things to get right : Use a tool to estimate what it would cost to replace your stuff . Notice I said `` replace '' . You can get insurance that would pay you the depreciated value of your stuff but , in my opinion , it 's worth a little bit more to get your stuff replaced with new . Your agent should have a tool to help you or you can use the one on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like the tool -RRB- . Pick a liability limit that will cover all your assets . I usually wo n't go below $ 300,000 and I usually recommend at least $ 500,000 . The price difference is usually below $ 10/yr . It 's well worth it . Be smart . Find an agent you can trust to do the best for you and take their advice . In the long run , you 'll be happy you did .
Allstate does offer life insurance through Allstate Life Insurance Company , Lincoln Benefit Life Company , American Heritage Life Insurance Company , and Allstate Life Insurance Company of New York . They offer both Term and Permanent life insurance products . To obtain a quote you can go to an agency or website selling life insurance through one of the Allstate companies . When using a quote engine , you will be able to compare their rates against the rates of other carriers .
Yes . Allstate offers multiple lines of insurance . Home , auto , business and life . If you are interested in getting Allstate insurance you should also consider bundling another product with it . The reason I say this is you can get a multi-line discount through Allstate that is pretty good . I am not an Allstate agent , but I have faced some serious competition from them due to the multi-line discount they offer . HOWEVER , I still must recommend contacting an independent agent to shop around for you . There are usually some regional carriers that can offer better prices with better coverage .
Allstate does offer life insurance through their subsidiaries : Allstate Life Insurance Company , Lincoln Benefit Life Insurance Company and American Heritage Life Insurance Company . To compare quotes from Life Insurance offered by Allstate with other life insurance quotes , you can visit a website with a quote engine that includes Lincoln Benefit Life .
Yes . They own Lincoln Benefit Life . The company offers life insurance and annuities through Allstate agents and well as independent life insurance agents -LRB- brokers -RRB- . They are a well respected company with competitive products . While independent agents can offer life insurance products from many companies , Allstate agents will be limited to life insurance and annuities issued by their subsidiaries : Allstate Life Insurance Company , Lincoln Benefit Life Insurance Company and American Heritage Life Insurance Company .
Renters insurance coverage from Allstate depends on a number of different factors . Of course , the amount of coverage on your personal contents is one of the biggest variables along with what other limits you elect . Where you live and what type of claims history may also play a role in the rate . A licensed Allstate broker can provide the exact rate ... probably in the $ 100 - $ 300 per year range .
Allstate has life insurance . They really do . Rates are somewhat competitive compared to other major insurers . Allstate is better known for their auto and home insurance prices were are usually competitive in most areas . For an Allstate quote on life insurance , or other carriers with lower rates , a full-time experienced broker can help the best .
Yes , Allstate offers renters insurance . Here is a link to their website for renters insurance : WEBSITELINK . I would suggest shopping around as well with the other companies like State Farm , American Family , etc. . Who is your automobile insurance with ? If you ask your company about renters there may be a discount for you as you can bundle different coverage 's that you need .
It depends on the State you live in . Allstate does offer homeowners insurance in most states . They have chosen not to offer homeowners in States where the losses have been too great to sustain . This is true with many companies . Allstate has Auto , Home , and Life insurance . While Allstate is a very good company , it always pays to shop around with your local independent agent before applying to make sure you are getting the best rate .
I 'm glad you asked this question . I wish more people would before they listen to someone tell them that the lowest price is the best . Nothing could be further from the truth . For a very reasonable and affordable premium , you can get renter 's insurance that works right for you . First , pick the right limit for your personal property -LRB- your stuff -RRB- . there are some great tools to help you estimate this and the number 's bigger than you think . One of the best is on Allstate 's website -LRB- no , I 'm not an Allstate agent , I just like their tool -RRB- . Next , pick the right settlement option . Actual Cash Value -LRB- ACV -RRB- : The insurance company will depreciate everything you lost and write you a check for that amount up to the policy limit . Replacement Cost : The insurance company will pay to replace the stuff you lost with new , up to the policy limit . I usually sell replacement cost because most people would rather have new stuff . Keep in mind , if you choose replacement cost , your limit should be higher than if you choose ACV . Make sure you have broad form or special form coverage on your personal property . This will ensure you have coverage for theft . Lastly , pick the right liability limit . If an agent tries to sell you a liability limit of $ 100,000 , run away and find a new agent . If you get sued , it will likely be for a lot more than $ 100,000 . Here 's the worst part , the premium difference between a limit of $ 100,000 and $ 500,000 could be as low as $ 9 per year -LRB- that 's what it is with my company -RRB- . The most important thing you should know is that a good agent will take the time to find out about you and the things you own . Then , he/she will put together the right coverage to protect you . If it costs a little more , pay it . An extra $ 50 premium might save you thousands at claim time .
If you wish to avoid a sales pitch and would rather take your time and utilize a Self Service Insurance portal , you may proceed to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online . If however , you would prefer to visit a retail agent and deal with a person directly , you may wish to contact Farmers , State Farm or Allstate and find your local agent who will be happy to make an appointment and answer your questions directly . The following link will provide an online format to obtain a quote and buy renters insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
Allstate does not underwrite and issue health insurance under their own brand . It is quite possible in your state that they have a marketing arrangement with a health insurance carrier that will actually underwrite , issue , collect premiums and pay claims . Your Allstate agent may or may not be well versed in health insurance options . You should always consider using an independent agent that specializes in health insurance plans .
The largest auto insurance insurer is State Farm , who reported 8.7 billion in premium last year . Berkshire Hathaway -LRB- GEICO -RRB- recently passed Allstate to become the second largest insurer . GEICO reported 4.8 billion , Allstate 4.6 . 4th is Progressive at 3.9 billion . Rounding out the top 5 is Liberty Mutual , who recently barely passed Farmers , both being at 2.5 billion .
Great question . Allstate home insurance policy will cover fire , lighting , wind damage , Personal Liability as well . Allstate is like most insurance companies on home owners very similar . I would call your local broker and have them shop around for the best rate and best price on your home insurance . Good Luck
Allstate is indeed a `` good '' auto insurance company . They are a very old and established carriers that offers competitive rates in most areas . Along with State Farm , Farmers , Progressive and Geico , they are very well-knownandrespected . An experienced broker will compare Allstate to dozens of other car insurance companies so you receive the lowest available prices .
Allstate is the parent company of Lincoln Benefit Life , which Allstate chose to develop their life and annuity products . Lincoln Benefit Life is based in my home state of Nebraska and is a good company . In order to find the best price with highly rated companies , you can go to free website quoters and Lincoln Benefit Life 's rates are included with other choices so you can see where it come in , price wise .
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does My Small Business Have To Offer Health Insurance ?
No . The employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 50 or more full-time/full-time equivalent employees . So , if your company has 20 full time employees and 6 part-time employees that probably translates into the equivalent of 23 full time employees and places you well below the threshold where you have to provide employee health insurance or be subject to the employer mandate tax penalty . If you need to attract and retain quality employees and reduce turnover then it may well be in your self interest as a small business to offer group health insurance to your employees . However , with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act 's health insurance marketplaces and premium tax subsidies to help persons between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level purchase individual health insurance the small business owner 's decision in this regard is more complicated now . If your workforce is largely lower income and you are asking or would be asking your employees to pay a significant portion of the cost of group health insurance it is possible you are actually doing your employees and their dependents a disservice by providing group health insurance as this effectively blocks them from purchasing subsidized individual health insurance in the government health insurance marketplaces . There is some analysis required and business philosophy decisions to be made by the small business owner in making the decision as to whether offering group health insurance is the best course of action in todays environment . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance broker who is well educated on the Affordable Care Act to help you make this decision . I am a 30 year industry veteran and Chartered Benefit Consultant , if I can be of assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me .
Technically no person or employer is required to provide health insurance under ObamaCare . In other words it is not a criminal offense you could be jailed for . ObamaCare uses a mixture of tax penalties , tax credits and subsidies to strongly motivate individuals and employers to provide health insurance either for themselves or , if you are an employer , for your employees . Small businesses with 2 to 49 employees are subject to no tax penalties for not providing health insurance for their employees . Depending upon the average income level of their workforce there is even a tax credit available to incentivize small employers to provide health insurance . In practical terms only a small percentage of small businesses have taken advantage of this credit . However , small businesses are also the first businesses to have theirhealth insuranceplans directly impacted by the requirements of ObamaCare for what is deemed an acceptable benefit plan design -LRB- deductible levels , services covered , removal of pre-existing condition exclusions , etc. -RRB- and this is leading to substantial rate increases for many small businesses or deterring somesmall businesses who were considering beginning to offer health insurance to their employees from doing so . Beginning in 2015 employers with 100 + full time employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if they offer no health insurance to their employees or a tax penalty of $ 3000 per employee who enrolls in the government marketplace and receives a tax subsidy due to the employer 's coverage being deemed unaffordable by the law 's standards . While these tax penalties appearmeaningful at first glance , they are really substantially less than it costs most large employers to provide health insurance currently to their employees . As such , it is debatable as to how much of an incentive the law will really be for large employers who do not currently provide health insurance to their employees to do so in the future and perversely it will be cheaper for most large employers to pay the tax penalty than to pay for health insurance for their employees . In 2016 the penalties and requirements I described above will be applied to employers in the 50 to 99 employee group size segment .
No , statistically around 99 % large companies in the US -LRB- 200 + employees -RRB- offer health benefits , about 96 % of medium companies -LRB- 50-199 employees -RRB- offer health benefits , and about 92 % of small companies -LRB- < 49 employees -RRB- offer health benefits . There may be a significant impact on the small employer statistics as state and federal exchanges become available . However I can confidently say that any such statistical shift in the small employer health benefits market will most likely be a short term -LRB- perhaps 3-5 year -RRB- variation that will in time reflect a very small impact in the % of small businesses offering health benefits . The complex structuring options and technical details will render the small business exchanges as effective at delivering optimal results as online tax software is in helping someone who is not well versed in accounting manage pay-roll and state/federal tax obligations/deductions . Also the businesses who do not provide meaningful benefit programs to their employees will find it hard to compete with the other companies who are able to leverage such programs to provide them with a distinct competitive advantage . That being said the exchanges will revolutionize the marketplace of individual health insurance policies .
Due to how fluid and dynamic the small business world is you will never be able to get a perfectly accurate figure on how many small businesses offer health insurance to their employees . However , studies over the last few years have show a slow but steady decline in the percentage of small businesses who offer group health insurance to their employees . In 2013 we witnessed the first time that the estimated percentage of small businesses offering group health insurance fell below the 50 % level , coming in at a little over 49 % . It is projected that this level will decrease somewhat further -LRB- probably mid-40 % range -RRB- when 2014 statistics can be compiled .
A business owner uses a business to convert their human capital -LRB- skills , energy and time -RRB- into a stream of income . However converting that business into a stream of retirement income is a different issue . When a business owner wishes to retire they remove from the business one of its greatest assetsthemselves ! There are a couple of options facing the business owner to use a business to generate retirement income . The first option is to sell the physical assets of the business for the best price possible and close the business . Under the best circumstances this approach will yield a percentage of the value of the assets and generates nothing from the good will of the business . However , this approach will free the business owner from all responsibility for the business and they can invest their time as they wish , free from the concerns of the business . A second option is to sell the business as a going concern . Selling a business is complicated . Whoever buys the business expects that the business will pay for itself . People dont buy a business on a whim . Unless the potential buyer of the business can secure outside financing -LRB- which is quite unusual -RRB- the business owner is actually going to become the banker for the people buying the business . The result is that a business owner will likely fail to realize the full value of the business . In most small businesses it is the personality of the owner that makes the business successful . When that owner retires the greatest asset of the firm has left as well . Even your best employee can not replace you . So now the business owner is the banker for a company that is probably going to be less successful and that will not generate much retirement income . Many sole-proprietors have poured all their profits into the company . When they want to retire they find that they have invested in little else . Since it is expensive and complicated to establish a retirement plan for the employees the entrepreneur forgets to set aside money for his own retirement . If the business owner establishes a retirement plan , that plan might reduce the value of the business because of its long term obligations . Often successor management fails . Making a success of a small business isnt easy . If successor management fails owing the original business owner money , that business owners retirement income is jeopardized or worse yet , the former owner might have to come back into the business at a time when it is inconvenient and perhaps damaging to their health . An entrepreneur can accumulate money for his own retirement by setting aside funds early in the business development . This is really difficult when the business is screaming for more cash . However , setting up a pension plan or other savings plan is crucial in order to have money on which to retire . Grooming successor management can be expensive and difficult but it is the only way to prepare a stable person with the capacity to purchase the firm . There needs to be a direct transfer of the face of the company from the original owner to the successor . The bookkeeper may be great but he is unlikely to lead a company into success when high personal contact is required . A business owner might consider selling the physical assets of the business , and also negotiate a contract that in exchange for a fee for a period of time at a stipulated rate the original owner will provide consulting for the successor . Then rather than paying a debt which is not deductible the successor is paying wages or a fee and that is deductible . The original business owner is receiving income rather than interest and payment of a debt . A business may have limited value when it comes time to retire . Plan for your retirement now , while you can .
No . The employer mandate provisions of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- apply to employers with 50 or more full-time/full-time equivalent employees . So , if your company has 20 full time employees and 6 part-time employees that probably translates into the equivalent of 23 full time employees and places you well below the threshold where you have to provide employee health insurance or be subject to the employer mandate tax penalty . If you need to attract and retain quality employees and reduce turnover then it may well be in your self interest as a small business to offer group health insurance to your employees . However , with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act 's health insurance marketplaces and premium tax subsidies to help persons between 100 % and 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level purchase individual health insurance the small business owner 's decision in this regard is more complicated now . If your workforce is largely lower income and you are asking or would be asking your employees to pay a significant portion of the cost of group health insurance it is possible you are actually doing your employees and their dependents a disservice by providing group health insurance as this effectively blocks them from purchasing subsidized individual health insurance in the government health insurance marketplaces . There is some analysis required and business philosophy decisions to be made by the small business owner in making the decision as to whether offering group health insurance is the best course of action in todays environment . You should seek out the services of an experienced health insurance broker who is well educated on the Affordable Care Act to help you make this decision . I am a 30 year industry veteran and Chartered Benefit Consultant , if I can be of assistance to you in this matter please feel free to contact me .
There are still too many variables to provide you a definitive answer . The state or states your workforce is located in , the size of your small business -LRB- less than 50 or greater than 50 employees ? -RRB- , the ages of your employees/spouses/dependent children to be covered , the number of dependent children to be covered , perhaps tobacco usage , plus factors such as health plan design all vary from group to group but are critical features defining fully insured health insurance rates in ObamaCare compliant plan designs . Speaking in very generic terms based upon marketplace quoting as of July 2014 , I would estimate unit cost ranges for small group plans -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- on a composite rated basis to generally fall within the following ranges : Employee Only : $ 250 to $ 425 Median : $ 325 Spousal Unit : $ 280 to $ 500 Median : $ 395 Per Child Unit -LRB- 3 max -RRB- $ 85 to $ 175Median : $ 120 -LRB- Note : dependent children age 21 to 26 charged separate young adult rate -RRB- This is based onno exhaustive analysis , just from what I have seen and gathered from my peers here in the mid-south . If someone were to give me the vague `` what would health insurance costs be for my small business '' questionto dosome business cost projections these would be reasonable ranges to expect to work within and approximate average costs per covered unit to experience at this time .
Unlike omst parts of the Affordable Care Act , if you are employed by a business with less than 50 full time employees , your employer has the option of offering coverage , but not is not mandated to do so . The health law does not require businesses with fewer than 50 employees to offer health insurance to their workers . Small Employers wanting to offer coverage to employees may do so using the SHOP exchange , which is meant to help small business owners find affordable coverage . The government offers certainincentives in the form oftax credits and deductions to encourage employers with fewer than 25 employees who set up coverage through SHOP and help pay for it . Currently in Alabama , the only way to sign up for a SHOP plan is to go see an agent , broker or insurance company and fill out the paperwork . Online enrollment is scheduled to be available during next fall 's open enrollment period , starting November 15 , 2014 .
Unlike omst parts of the Affordable Care Act , if you are employed by a business with less than 50 full time employees , your employer has the option of offering coverage , but not is not mandated to do so . The health law does not require businesses with fewer than 50 employees to offer health insurance to their workers . Small Employers wanting to offer coverage to employees may do so using the SHOP exchange , which is meant to help small business owners find affordable coverage . The government offers certainincentives in the form oftax credits and deductions to encourage employers with fewer than 25 employees who set up coverage through SHOP and help pay for it . Currently in Georgia , the only way to sign up for a SHOP plan is to go see an agent , broker or insurance company and fill out the paperwork . Online enrollment is scheduled to be available during next fall 's open enrollment period , starting November 15 , 2014 .
In an aggregate sense , Yes . The basic costs of health care -LRB- doctor & hospital services , prescription drugs , etc. -RRB- and our population 's consumption of health care services have been steadily increasing for decades . Health insurance costs are merely a reflection of these underlying factors . When one drills down to a specific company 's or a specific individual 's history with their health insurance premiums then you will find substantial variations in individual results . A knowledgeable and experienced health insurance broker/consultant can often manage their client 's benefits costs in ways that `` beat the market '' just like there always are some financial experts who outperform their peers in the stock market . The vast majority of my small business clients for instance have premium costs and benefit levels in 2014 that are not radical departures from their costs of a few to several years ago or , at the worst , they know that they have the best possible base cost level currently available to them in their marketplaces . This requires constant oversight of changing marketplace conditions , switching insurance carriers to take advantage of whichever carrier has the best value proposition at that particular time , and some fine tuning of benefit plan designs and funding approaches over a period of years to accomplish these results . But , it can be done because I have done it . The implementation of the new requirements of ObamaCare have upset the long established rules for the health insurance marketplace and are having a profound impact on health insurance plan designs and costs . ObamaCare addressed many access issues to health insurance coverage -LRB- guaranteed issue of policies , no pre-existing conditions , etc. -RRB- but really does nothing to reduce either healthcare costs or consumption . In fact , many can argue that ObamaCare is helping to increase both costs and consumption which will translate into higher health insurance costs . Certainly ObamaCare is the most profound change in our nation 's health insurance system in most people 's lifetimes and it will make the years ahead much more challenging for both individuals and businesses when it comes to managing their health insurance & health care costs . The guidance of an experienced health insurance expert who is staying on top of the rapid changes being prompted by ObamaCare is now more important than ever to both the individual and business health insurance consumer . If I can be of assistance in guiding you through these uncharted waters please feel free to contact me so I can put my 30 years of experience to work for you .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
what does Simple retirement plan mean ? It means that someone is using a boilerplate retirement plan created by the IRS to provide a retirement program for a small business . I love Simples as their name says it all . A Simple is a straight forward plan design with only a few requirements to comply with to have the plan . The best part for a small business owner is it costs next to nothing to provide . There is no testing of the plan which costs money . Just a nominal per head fee of active participants . The employer does n't pay fees for testing employees and accounting for employees who are n't in the plan . For a small business a Simple is a great choice for putting a retirement plan together for employees .
A very good and perceptive question . From the perspective of a 30-year health insurance veteran I can certainly say that by the standards of the mid-1980 's when $ 250 or $ 500 deductibles were the norm almost any health insurance plan offered today is a high deductible plan . Now , high deductible health plan means different things to different people/organizations . Since the inception of Health Savings Accounts in 2003 the term high deductible health plan was generally associated with a health insurance policy designed to be complimented by a Health Savings Account . Over the years , as health care costs have continued to escalate and pull health insurance costs up along with them , there has been a steady increase in plan deductibles in traditional health insurance plans that feature copayments for services like doctors visits and prescription drugs . With the implementation of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- this trend has accelerated sharply for a variety of reasons . Today my average small group employer client usually has a deductible in the $ 2000 to $ 2500 range and in the individual health insurance market plans with deductibles in the $ 4000 to $ 6000 range are not uncommon , and these are all for plans that still maintain many copayment features and are not qualified for use with a Health Savings Account . If the Cadillac Tax provisions of the Affordable Care Act go into effect in 2018 as currently planned this will place great pressure on many organizations to increase their plan deductibles significantly to keep their premium levels below the threshold where this tax would be assessed . This will impact many organization that have traditionally offered rich health benefits packages to their employees/members . State , county and municipal governments , educational institutions , hospitals , and ironically many labor union plans are some of the prime examples of organizations that will be adversely impacted by this tax . So , to a fairly large extent , one can argue that high deductible health plans have already become the norm in the individual and small group health insurance markets and are in the process of being joined by their cousins in larger businesses . Absent some serious changes in America 's health care cost structure and the requirements of the Affordable Care Act the move to high deductible plans with their associated cost shifting to the health care consumer are a foregone conclusion .
what is a SIMPLE retirement plan ? A Simple is an inexpensive opportunity for a small business to have a retirement plan that does n't break the bank in advisor fees . A Simple plan is an IRS approved plan with only a few steps to follow so expensive testing and record keeping are n't necessary . For any small business who are considering a retirement plan to offer , this should be right on top as it does provide a great platform for a business who would rather use it 's money to put towards employees retirements rather than third party administers plans .
I presume that you are not eligible for Medicare for some reason . You might investigate individual health insurance though with the open enrollment season having concluded on February 15th you would have to have a `` Change of Life Status '' event occur or qualify under the provisions of the upcoming special election period beginning March 15th -LRB- this is for people who were uninsured in 2014 and have just figured out they are going to have to pay the individual mandate tax penalty and that they would be subject to the individual tax mandate penalty for the 2015 tax year -RRB- . If you were to qualify you would have to be prepared to pay a pretty high monthly premium . If you have a business or have a spouse that has a business and some employees you might consider a group health plan . I recently wrote a small group where a man about your age had emigrated from Europe because he had married an American lady about 20 years younger than him and they had a small business with a couple of other employees . that man is now covered as his spouse 's dependent under their small group plan .
Are you asking in reference to whether setting up a group health plan can be denied or can a claim by someone under a group health plan be denied ? Setting up a group health plan is considered guaranteed issue , but typically certain requirements are necessary to do so . For guaranteed issue status , most companies would require at least 10 people to be active under the plan -LRB- some may go to 5 as a minimum -RRB- . Whether you 're viewed as a small business or large business is essential to understand as well as they require different things for underwriting and the programs available feature varying benefit structures . Group health insurance quotes can vary greatly on these and other factors such as type of plan -LRB- HSA , HMO , PPO , etc. -RRB- - there are no online instant quotes for this type of coverage . These types of quotes are based on the size of your business , the industrys SIC code , age of employees , and average employee health -LRB- although some states may not require medical underwriting -RRB- . There are no instant online quotes for group health insurance . To secure a quote , you will need to consult with a health insurance agent -LRB- with a background in group health insurance -RRB- . I would suggest consulting with an independent agent who can shop the case for you and compare options from multiple companies . In regards to the second part of my initial clarification question , if you 're asking whether a claim can be denied if you belong to a group health plan , the answer is yes . A claim can be denied just like an individual plan if the service completed was not deemed to be medically necessary -LRB- e.g. elective cosmetic surgery -RRB- . It 's important to review the benefits under your health plan . If you 'd like some help gathering the most accurate quotes and securing the coverage at the lowest cost , please send me an e-mail via the contact me button next to my name with your name and contact information to reach you at . We have an agent in our group who has a strong background in group health plans . I hope the information is helpful - thanks very much .
This is a very pertinent question in the era of ObamaCare . As the term `` portability '' implies , this is the ability for a person to own and take their health insurance coverage with them regardless of their employment circumstances . The concern about portability of health insurance coverage flows from the history in our nation where for many decades most working Americans received their health insurance coverage through their employer . In an era where many people would work for the same company for most , if not all , of their working life , there was little concern about losing access to health insurance coverage . As our global economy and the American workforce have evolved over the last generation and it is now common for a person to work for multiple companies over the course of their working lives and having your health insurance tied to your place of employment has become more problematic for some people and become a social , business and political issue . A common example is the person who works for a company that provides health insurance benefits to its employees and this person has a pre-existing health condition like diabetes or has a covered dependent with a chronic health problem requiring expensive ongoing care that is covered by their current employer 's health plan . One day this employee may be presented with a job opportunity with another company that offers them a promotion and an increase in pay that would further their career but this prospective new employer does not offer health insurance to its employees . Losing their current employer 's health coverage might have left this person or their dependents uninsurable or faced with such high out-of-pocket expenses for individual health insurance and out-of-pocket expenses that these factors would negate the new job opportunity being offered this person . Similar examples can be given for the person who wants to leave and start their own business , medical cost issues have made it difficult , if not impossible , for some people to pursue such opportunities . This is what is referred to as `` Job Lock '' . One of the positive aspects of ObamaCare is that with its guaranteed issue and no pre-existing conditions exclusions or coverage waiting period requirements , people are guaranteed access to individual or small group health insurance . Technically , this does break the chains of `` job lock '' for such persons . Please note though , that I stressed the changes made by ObamaCare have removed barriers to access to health insurance . Depending upon the income level of the person , it -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- may or may not remove the cost barriers associated with getting health insurance due to the resulting increases in health insurance rates we have seen and are seeing . But , in the ideal scenario , these new provisions of the health law provide persons with the security of owning their own health insurance coverage that is not tied to their place of employment thus eliminating concerns about `` job lock '' and freeing them to pursue other professional or personal goals that they might not have otherwise been able to address .
Your question is a common one these days . It may be a subtle distinction but I 'm a firm believer in being clear on our terminology . Many employers and employees think that the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- legally requires employers to provide health insurance to their employees . This is not the case . In fact , ObamaCare may possibly have the result of reducing the number of employers who provide health insurance for their employees . Only time will tell on this issue . What the Affordable Care Act does is provide a mixture of incentives and penalties to employers regarding their choice as to whether to offer group health insurance to their employees . At the current time you need to subdivide the employer marketplace into three different segments and understand how the law applies to each one in the coming years . 1 -RRB- The small group market -LRB- 2 to 49 employees -RRB- - for companies of this size there is a possible incentive in the form of a tax credit to encourage employers to offer health insurance to their employees . THERE ARE NO TAX PENALTIES FOR EMPLOYERS IN THIS SIZE RANGE WHO DO NOT OFFER GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE TO THEIR EMPLOYEES . As with many aspects of the Affordable Care Act , even the availability and value of the tax credit is confusing and ends up being of little or no value to most small employers . First , the employer will have to purchase group health coverage through the SHOP program of the government health marketplace in their state in order to qualify for the tax credit of 50 % of what the employer contributes towards employee coverage . This may significantly reduce the employer 's options . For instance , here in Tennessee , only one group health insurance carrier has chosen to participate in the SHOP program in 2014 . So your choice is Blue Cross/Blue Shield in that case . The employer may find significantly less expensive group plan options from other insurance companies outside of the SHOP program . Next , the tax credit really only applies to groups of up to 24 employees and actually maxes out for groups with 10 or fewer employees , plus your average workforce wage has to be below $ 50,000 / year . And , the tax credit can only be claimed for two consecutive tax years . For these reasons the tax `` incentives '' provide little real incentive for most small employers to use the SHOP program and the SHOP program has done little to increase competition in most states . 2 -RRB- Groups with 50 to 99 employees - originally groups in this size range were to be subject to the Employer Mandate on January 1 , 2014 . However , the Obama administration delayed implementation of the employer mandate for groups of this size until January 1 , 2016 . So , while there are some issues employers in this size range need to be aware of and planning for , in most ways the status quo remains unchanged for employers in this size range . 3 -RRB- Employers with 100 or more Full Time/Full Time Equivalent employees - for employers who fall into this category the Employer Mandate provision was delayed only until January 1 , 2015 . After that date employers in this size range who offer no health insurance to their employees will be subject to a tax penalty of $ 2000 per employee if at least one of their employees purchases individual health insurance through the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . A second tax penalty situation is created for employers who offer health insurance to their employees which is deemed unaffordable under the terms of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- the cost to the employee must exceed 9.5 % of their W2 income -RRB- . In this circumstance the employer is subject to a tax penalty of $ 3000 for each employee who enrolls for individual coverage in the government health insurance marketplace and receives a premium tax subsidy . To make the tax penalties a bit more punitive , they will not be a deductible business expense . At first glance these potential tax penalties might appear to many to be a strong incentive for larger employers to provide health insurance to their employees . But , in practical terms , the tax penalties are often far less expensive than providing group health insurance especially in light of the additional coverage requirements of the Affordable Care Act that are driving health insurance rates up even further . So , no employer has to provide health insurance to their employees . And for larger employers it is simply a decision as to whether to bear the cost of providing group health insurance or paying a tax penalty .
What retirement plan is best for small business ? In my opinion I feel SIMPLE plans offer a great value to small business employers who want to set up a qualified plan that is easy to install , easy to account for and simply easy to maintain . What 's that like three `` easys '' and we 're talking qualified plans ? That should sell anybody to at least look at the simple as an option .
This is the question millions of Americans will be asking themselves over the next few months and it is a crucial one . There are many factors involved in your decision to purchase individual major medical insurance . Some crucial ones are ; 1 -RRB- Will my or my family 's expected income for 2015 fall in the range that would qualify me/us for a premium subsidy and possible cost sharing reductions for coverage purchased through the government health insurance marketplace -LRB- 100 % to 400 % of the Federal Poverty Level -RRB- ? 2 -RRB- If I do qualify for a subsidy is it enough to influence my buying decision ? Premium subsidies peak in the 250 % to 300 % of the Federal Poverty Level zone and decline rapidly from there . For example , an individual making $ 40,000 / yr would technically qualify for a subsidy but the dollar amount would be small enough that you may decide its not worth the trouble -LRB- this may be especially true in states with limited carrier choices in the government marketplace -RRB- . 3 -RRB- Are the doctors , hospitals and pharmacies I want to use in-network providers with the health plan I am considering enrolling in ? 4 -RRB- What is the coverage for prescription drugs in the plan I am considering ? Are the prescription drugs I am already taking covered by the formulary of the health plan I am considering ? And , if they are , at what level are they covered and might I be forced to revisit the steps that led me to finding the prescription medication that works for me and my health condition before my new health plan would cover them ? 4 -RRB- What coverage does the health plan I am considering offer outside of my home area ? Can I plug into a national network of providers wherever I might be or is my coverage largely restricted to my home service area ? 5 -RRB- If I am diagnosed with a serious illness like cancer will the health plan I am consider cover services from providers like M.D. Anderson , the Mayo Clinic and other nationally recognized centers of excellence ? The consumer can no longer just assume that this will be the case . While these questions do n't cover all the questions a person should ask , if you get the answer you like for the questions I 've posed you will have a much higher probability of being satisfied with the health insurance plan you select . For the vast majority of people , you will be better served to seek out the services of an experienced health insurance agent who is familiar with the insurance carriers available in your market and who can help guide you to the plan the best suits your needs whether it is inside or outside of the government health insurance marketplaces .
end question
start question
life-insurance
What Is Embedded Value In Life Insurance ?
Not sure what you mean by `` embedded value '' in life insurance . Life insurance pays a death benefit that is normally income tax free to the beneficiary . In addition , for permanent policies , after the first few years , there may be cash surrender value available in the event the policy is `` cashed in '' and coverage canceled by the policy owner . Or , a portion of the cash value can be borrowed from the policy and coverage maintained .
Embedded value in a conservative life insurance accounting term the measures the present value of future profits -LRB- PVFP -RRB- and adjusted net asset -LRB- ANAV -RRB- value , i.e. ANAV + PVFP = EV . It is used in stock life insurance companies in an attempt to assess a companys worth to predict shareholder value .
You have asked the question that confuses more consumers and insurance brokers than just about any other terminology in our industry . Usually this question comes up in the context of a high deductible health plan associated with a Health Savings Account -LRB- HSA -RRB- . There are two types of deductibles offered with these plans ; aggregate and embedded . An aggregate deductible plan requires that more than one deductible be met before the plan 's co-insurance and other coverage provisions come into effect . Usually two deductibles have to be met but you will want to check the exact policy language for the state you are purchasing coverage within . For example , you purchase an HSA plan with a $ 3000 aggregate deductible for you and your spouse and this plan has 100 % co-insurance after the aggregate deductible has been met . What this means in practical terms is that both of you will have to meet an `` aggregate '' total of $ 6000 in out-of-pocket expenses before you and your spouse are covered at 100 % . So , let 's say that spouse A has $ 3000 in medical expenses for an outpatient surgery while spouse B incurs no expenses at all that year and then spouse A has an additional $ 1000 in expenses for office visits and prescriptions . Even though spouse A had already had $ 3000 in covered expenses because the deductible exposure of spouse A and spouse B are `` aggregated '' together , the additional $ 1000 of expenses incurred by spouse A later in the year are charged against the aggregated deductible amount and remain an out-of-pocket expense . Under an embedded deductible arrangement with the same $ 3000 deductible followed by 100 % coverage , each spouse has a separate $ 3000 deductible exposure that once met places that particular spouse into their 100 % coverage zone . So , in the example used in the previous paragraph , spouse A would have met their deductible with the initial $ 3000 expense and their $ 1000 in subsequent expenses would have been covered at 100 % by the insurance company . Generally the premium difference between plans with an aggregate and an embedded deductible is not that significant , especially as deductibles get higher . For this reason , I rarely recommend an aggregate deductible plan design to my HSA clients . If you would like more information or a quote for a Health Savings Account based plan please feel free to contact me .
Embedded value in a conservative life insurance accounting term the measures the present value of future profits -LRB- PVFP -RRB- and adjusted net asset -LRB- ANAV -RRB- value , i.e. ANAV + PVFP = EV . It is used in stock life insurance companies in an attempt to assess a companys worth to predict shareholder value .
Not sure what you mean by `` embedded value '' in life insurance . Life insurance pays a death benefit that is normally income tax free to the beneficiary . In addition , for permanent policies , after the first few years , there may be cash surrender value available in the event the policy is `` cashed in '' and coverage canceled by the policy owner . Or , a portion of the cash value can be borrowed from the policy and coverage maintained .
The # 1 item in reviewing long term disability insurance is the contractual language of the policy . You do n't want to wait until a claim to discover the interpretation of your policy provisions . Next is the elimination period and the associated `` triggering '' events that are necessary to generate the benefits of the policy . Price is a value proposition . Some policies have embedded value , while others charge for the `` additional '' policy perk . You should shop online with a brokerage company that offers several disability companies and has expertise in morbidity products .
Life insurance is a mortality product that indemnifies the death of the policy insured . Life insurance may have an embedded disability provision or an additional rider for the cost of insurance or the entire annual premium . Some life insurance polices have additional morbidity riders such as disability insurance , generally on a limited basis .
Life insurance is a mortality insurance product . Critical illness insurance is a morbidity insurance product . Life insurance pays a death claim in the event of the demise of the policy insured and critical illness pays a stated amount for a major sickness . There are life insurance policies that offer critical illness riders -LRB- and other riders -RRB- , some of which are embedded free of charge and some that are additional costs to the policy owner .
Life Insurance Policies come in two product categories : Term or Permanent . Term life insurance can be purchased with simplified or full underwriting . It can offer annual renewable or guaranteed level coverage periods like 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 , 30 and a few at 40 year . -LRB- The longer the coverage period the more age becomes a factor and based on age , companies limit the length of coverage . -RRB- Some term life insurance includes convertibility clauses to extend coverage and offer living benefits either embedded in the policy or as an additional rider . Permanent life insurance has three types : Participating whole life , guaranteed universal life and current assumption universal life that uses interest rates , indices or separate sub accounts as crediting methods .
A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals .
Life Insurance in itself is a mortality insurance product that pays death benefit proceeds to the beneficiary of the policy upon the death of the policy insured . If the life insurance policy has an embedded or an add on rider featuring a morbidity provision , in this case , critical illness it will pay out the benefits correlated to a critical illness event .
A non-qualified variable annuity accumulates tax deferred with access to the market . High tax bracket individuals could benefit from the tax deferral aspects of variable annuities . A variable annuity is a security and insurance product that needs to be deemed suitable for the buyer before moving forward with the purchase . Once you 've determined your risk tolerance and product suitability you can rank variable annuities by expense loads and policy provisions that best fit your financial goals . You could lose money in variable annuities . Variable annuities have differing embedded policy provisions and additional riders , usually , for an addition price . Expense loads may dictate the value of the variable annuity as does the portfolio of separate sub accounts . Variable annuities have performance records and risk assessments published through Morning Star .
There are many riders that are associated with most life insurance policies : wavier of premium , term life insurance , long term care , critical illness , catastrophic care , terminal illness , to name a few . These additional benefits may be embedded into the policy at no charge or have cost associated with them .
Many types of life insurance offer additional protection items called riders . some of them are free and embedded into the policy , while most cost more money to add them on to the base policy . Here 's just a few of the examples of the riders offered with life insurance : waver of premium , spousal , children , long term care , critical illness , terminal illness , etc. .
No . Term life insurance can be purchased with simplified or full underwriting . It can offer annual renewable or guaranteed level coverage periods like 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 , 30 and a few at 40 year . -LRB- The longer the coverage period the more age becomes a factor and based on age , companies limit the length of coverage . -RRB- Some term life insurance includes convertibility clauses to extend coverage and offer living benefits either embedded in the policy or as an additional rider .
Double indemnity provisions can be embedded into life insurance policies providing twice the death benefit if death was deemed accidental . To secure a policy that addresses this , keep in mind that higher premiums will be charged to cover double indemnity contracts . The odds of accidental death are not very high , so most insurance planners dont address it .
Hybrid annuities are generally annuities with morbidity riders or embedded contract provisions like long term care , critical illness , catastrophic events , etc. . Some of these added living benefits are free or have extra charges associated with them . Some annuities with long term care may have some tax advantages under the Pension Protection Act that could be very valuable to a policy owner .
Once the policy insured has undergone the underwriting process without any misrepresentation of material facts , including medical information and the underwriting offer is accepted and put in force with the associated premium payment , the policy will pay the death claims proceeds on any death , including cancer . This assumes the policy is full coverage and not AD&D and no cancer exclusions are embedded in the policy .
It depends on your personal situation . I personally like Medigap if you can afford the premiums . With Medigap you will not have to worry about networks , you can go to any doctor that accepts Medicare , and your out of pocket exposure will be much less . Medicare Advantage is a good choice for those with limited funds or those who live in an area where there are strong networks , as long as you do not travel outside the area for extended periods . Medicare Advantage has the Prescription coverage embedded in the plan -LRB- in most cases -RRB- and can have very low or no premium . A good independent agent who handles both Medigap and Medicare Advantage can help guide you . Make sure the agent handles most of the plans in your area and takes time to ask about your personal situation .
It may . Talk to your Insurance Professional about the terms and conditions of your policy . If for example , yoo have a tree that you KNEW was severely diseased or dead and did nothing about removing it . If a storm came up and blew that tree down and onto your neighbor 's home or cars , then you very well could be considered negligent in maintaining your property and therefore it might be possible that coverage would be found in the Liability portion of your policy . Change that to a perfectly healthy tree . The storm comes up and there are embedded micro bursts that simply knock the tree over and onto the neighbor 's home or cars . In that scenario , you are more than likely not liable for the damage because there would be no negligence on your part .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Is Landlord Insurance More Expensive Than Homeowners ?
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
We will begin to answer this question with the following caution : when one asks about a policy being ` cheaper ' than another -LRB- especially when it is the first question asked -RRB- , the immediate concern arises regarding the lack of importance of the coverage which is the primary reason for purchasing the insurance . To answer the question correctly , Homeowners Insuranceand Landlords Insuranceare not related in any way other than to provide property coverage on a similar dwelling . TheHomeowners Insurance policy is defined and writtenfor the Owner Occupied home of the titled owner of the property ; the Landlords Insurance policy is defined and written for the Tenant Occupedhome of the titled owner of the property . Each policy contract contains an Occupancy Clause stating the occupancy of thedwelling insured . We have witnessed large losses which have been denied by carriers due to the occupancy not matching the policy purpose . Therefore , if you have a tenant occupied home , you will need to purchase a Landlords Policy and if you are seeking to insure your primary home , you should purchase a Homeowners Policy . The LandlordsPolicy statistically poses a greater risk factor to the insurance company ; however generally , the LandlordsPolicy does not provide coverage for personal property -LRB- contents -RRB- and provides a more limited form of Liability Coverage listed as Premises OnlyLiability . Now , regarding cost , the premium is specific to the carrier 's experience with each type of policy.There are insurance carriers that have a much worse historic experience on tenant occupied properties ; thus , the Landlords Policy would be rated as a higher risk than the Homeowners Policy . However , in most cases , for the same Dwelling Coverage amount , we find that the Landlords Policy Premium islower than the Homeowners Policy . Awise word to the public would be to purchase the correct coverage for the application since if a futureclaim is denied based on the incorrect policy form being purchased , the whole purpose of the insurance is void and unnecessary . For more information regaring Homeowners Insurance , please click the following link : WEBSITELINK
Homeowners Insurance is not available for a Rental Property . Homeowners Insurance is defined as the policy to protect the primary residence of the titled owner of the subject property . Rental Property should be covered by a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Policy which is designed to provide coverage for tenant occupied 1 - 4 unit residences . Although mortgage companies use the term ` hazard insurance ' as a requirement to provide fire insurance on the collateral upon which a loan is extended , it is important for a home owner to purchase the correct form of insurance.Forexample , during the real estate boom , many investors purchased homes as primary home for the purpose of obtaining an owner-occupied mortgage loan thereby obtaining a lower interest rate although they clearly intended to maintain the home as a rental property , in an effort to keep thematching story , they purchased homeowners insurance simply stating that the home was the primary residence.Following an unfortunate occurrence and the filing of an insurance claim , it was found that the risk had been misrepresented and the claim was denied followed by the cancellation of the policy and the return of premium . It is essential that the correct form of insurance ispurchased ifthere is an interest inobtaining protection for the home . Homeowners Insurance is a lower risk than Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance simply due to the fact that an owner occupied property proves tocreate less insurance claims than a tenant occupied property . However , homeowners insurance has more elements of coverage that are not included in a Landlords - Dwelling Fire Insurance policy . Depending on claims statistics in different regions of the nation , all carriers will havedifferent rates for bothHomeowners Insurance and Landlords Insurance . In some areas , one may find lower rates for one type of coverage where in another area , one may find the reverse . When asked if home insurance is cheaper than rental property insurance , it is an immediate opportunity toinquire regarding the actual occupancy of the home . There is a linkproviding an online format to obtain a quote and buy both home insurance and dwelling fire insurance online in multiple States ; it may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
The answer here is `` maybe '' . It really depends upon the situation and the coverage . In general , if you consider the same house and the same coverage , the homeowners coverage will cost you less . let 's start with some terms . In the industry , we usually call landlord insurance either dwelling fire , or a dwelling policy . It points to the difference between this and a homeowners policy . A homeowners policy has 6 coverages : A. Dwelling - the structure B . Other Structures - detached garages , shed 's , pole barns , etc. . C. Personal Property - Your stuff D. Loss of Use - The extra costs you 'll incur if you have to live somewhere while your home is repaired E. Personal Liability - Protects you from being sued F. Medical Payments - Pays for injuries that happen on your property without having to be sued . A Dwelling Policy , in general does n't have any coverage C , Personal Property . As a landlord , you 're worried about the building and your liability . Your tenant 's personal property is their responsibility to insure . Dwelling policies are more complicated to put together than homeowners policies but I 'll leave that discussion for another time . Lets talk about why Dwelling Policy usually costs more than a Homeowners policy . With a homeowners policy the insurance company has a greater sense of security because they only have one entity to worry about , the homeowners and their family . They have a financial interest in keeping their home safe , secure , and in good repair . With a rental property , you may have many different tenants occupy that home and they have no financial interest in the home itself . A tenant is much more likely to let things go that may eventually cause a claim . Additionally , with a homeowners policy , the liability is protecting the insured from others , with a dwelling policy , you 're also being protected from the people that actually occupy the home . Now , one last thing to mention . If you 're renting your home and it 's insured on a homeowners policy , change it now . If there 's a claim on the home and the insurance company finds out it 's being rented , they may refuse to pay your claim . Most homeowners policies require the home to be occupied by the owner for coverage to apply . Find a good agent that knows how this works and how to put this coverage together for your situation . It 's much better to know what your coverage is and make choices rather then to think you have coverage you really do n't
A Landlord can require Renters Insurance in any State as a condition of the Lease Agreement . Renters Insurance is an increasingly more valuable commodity for both home owners and renters in a very litigious society . Renters Insurance provides the Landlord peace of mind in the event a claim occurs as the result of the tenant 's negligence ; the home owner will not be negatively impacted by their insurance . Many Landlords require the Tenant to list the Landlord as an ` Additional Insured ' on the Renters Insurance Policy this will insure the Landlord receives a copy of all correspondence including cancellation notices and renewal notices . Renters Insurance provides coverage for the tenant 's Personal Property as well as offering Personal Liability coverage which is the specific section in the interest of the Landlord . Without this important coverage , legal actions are more damaging and cumbersome for all parties concerned . There are a few States that have required all tenants in the State to purchase Renters Insurance and the requirement is a compulsory section of the Standard Lease Agreement which is signed by both the Landlords and Tenants . States have taken this action due to an overwhelming load of small claims cases burdening the Court System . Renters Insurance is an inexpensive form of security which all responsible tenants should wish to have ; in many localities , a policy can be purchased for as little as $ 8.00 per month . For a Renters Insurance quote , there is an available link to obtain your quote and purchase the policy online : WEBSITELINK In order to produce the lowest rate , you will need to select the minimum amount of Personal Property Coverage available to cover all your possessions , select the minimum required Personal Liability Limit , and select the maximum available Deductible . The deductible does n't apply to the Personal Liability section , so if this is the only reason that you are buying the policy , the maximum deductible should be purchased to obtain the lowest premium .
A landlord can usually require tenants to carry their own renters insurance . Some States have regulations that must be satisfied first but most landlords can require it in the rental contract . The major purpose for the landlord is to provide a shield of sorts , from some or all liability associated with the rented dwelling , in the event of a loss to either property or persons . There are several obvious reasons concerning property and liability that make it important for both parties actually . For example , if a renter 's property was damaged by a covered peril , the renter might look to the landlord for recovery . However , absent the landlord 's liability in relation to the loss , the renter would not be reimbursed without their own renters policy in existence . Also , as another example , if a visitor was injured in the renter 's apartment , in the absence of a renters policy , the injured person might look to the landlord as the sole source of reimbursement for injuries , which , of course could be substantial in nature . The landlord certainly has a right to protect him or herself in this instance . It just makes good , logical sense ... all the way around ... for landlords to require tenants to carry renters insurance .
There are two reasons why you might be required to have a renters policy . Your landlord is not responsible for your personal property in the rental unit . If the unit was to burn and your property is destroyed you dont have a claim against the landlord . If someone is injured in your unit and sues you , it isnt your landlord that is responsible , it is you . To make sure that the landlord and you dont have misunderstandings and that the expense for the lawsuit is handled properly , the landlord is making it a requirement of your tenancy to maintain a renters policy and probably is requiring that he be named as an additional insured .
In New York there are few variations in the renters policy . The basic policy covers Personal Property , Additional Living Expense , Medical Payments , and Personal Liability . Many insurance carriers use their own policy forms and endorsements . A reputable agent or broker will have a specimen policy available and can outline the various coverages . Your Personal Property can be covered for Actual Cash Value or Replacement Cost . A good insurance representative can explain the difference in terms you can understand . The standard renters policy provides ` named perils ' on your personal property . ` Open perils ' commonly known as ` all risk ' is also available for more premium . Deductibles for the property coverage start at $ 100 or $ 250 and go up from there . The higher the deductible , the more the savings in premium . Many landlords require their tenants carry renters insurance and provide evidence of it - so if this is your situation , find out what the requirements are . Most insurance carriers in NY will not add the landlord as an ` additional insured ' under the personalliability section . Sometimes landlords request this in the rental agreement . Usually , a copy of the declarations page will satisfy the landlord .
Great Question . Landlord insurance will be a bit less than homeowners insurance due to the fact it will not cover as much as the full homeowners policy will cover . Some companies charge as much as % 50 less for landlord policies . If you rent your home you much inform you insurance company .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
That is a great question , with a very simple answer ! Your landlord wants to pay lower insurance premiums himself ! By ensuring that each tenant that they rent to has a renters policy , the risk that the landlord 's insurance company has to shell out after a catastrophe is lessened . The tenant causes the catastrophe , their insurance company is liable for the damages , not the landlords . Hopefully the landlord is passing along his or her savings to you in the form of cheaper rent . Thank you for asking ! -LRB- p.s. renters insurance is cheap , and a really good idea for you to have anyway , so the landlord is really doing you a favor by requiring that you have it . -RRB-
The reason why landlords want insurance is to protect themselves for either property loss or a liability suit . If you are a tenant in a commercial building and a client of yours gets hurt on your premises then that client may potentially sue you . If you have no insurance the client may sue the building owner just because it 's the landlords building even though the tenant may be the party who caused the loss . Same is true for private residences . The landlord does not want to take on a suit because your friend fell down in your home . Now for the record , just because the victim goes after the landlord does not mean you are off the hook as a tenant . If the landlords insurance ends up having to pay a claim you can almost surely bet they are coming after you so my suggestion is carry the insurance . There are way to many upsides and virtually no down side .
-- > Normal 0 While I have no intention to question a colleague , Im not sure I would place a Travelers Tenants policy in the Excellent column , good , maybe , but certainly not excellent . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy covers your personal property but limits that coverage to specific named perils . In my opinion , an excellent tenant homeowners policy would cover any direct damage -LRB- except for specific exclusions and limitations -RRB- . The basic Travelers tenants policy covers the insured for the Actual Cash Value of their property . An excellent policy would cover the full replacement cost of covered property , new for old . The Travelers tenant homeowners policy , like many others , covers your personal property but limits theft coverage on Jewelry , Furs or Silver to , I believe , $ 1000 . An excellent policy would have either no limitations or the limits would be no less than $ 5000 in the aggregate for each category . The Travelers liability coverage excludes , as do most other tenants policies , property damage to property in the insureds care , custody or control . Generally that would include property damage to the apartment you are living in . This exclusion would not apply to Fire or Smoke damage but I dont believe water damage to the apartment you rent would be covered by the basic policy . Securing coverage for accidental damage to the apartment they are living in may be a very important coverage for most apartment renters . Obtaining a waiver from your landlord for any damage covered by the landlords insurance may be the best and most economical alternative . If buying coverage on-line or face to face from a local broker , I suggest these questions be raised and addressed .
I think what you are calling landlord insurance is normally called , fire insurance . The basic difference between a fire policy and a homeowners policy is coverage C , personal property . Although a landlord might have some personal property in a rented home and that can be covered , most do not and so the landlord is only concerned about the residence itself .
Technically a renters policy covers the personal property and liability assumed of the tenant . However , the presence of the policy greatly reduces the risk that the landlord will be sucked into some sort of action should personal property be damaged -LRB- sometimes in conjunction with a loss to the structure . -RRB- If the landlord is named as an additional insured it also consolidates the defense against bodily injury and property damage which ultimately saves money for the landlord . The presence of a renters policy does not reduce the liability exposure that the landlord has ; however , it does take away confusion over loss of personal property and clarifies who is going to respond should a suit be lodged against the landlord and the tenant at the same time for the same incident .
If you own a home that is used as a Rental ; you would declare your Rental Income on a separate schedule on your income taxes . On the same reporting form , you will deduct expenses including property tax , insurance and any other deductible expenses . In this case , you would not have a Homeowners Insurance Policy , the policy should be a Landlords Package Policy instead meant for a tenant occupied property . If you do not carry the correct form of insurance , it is essential that you cancel your policy and purchase the correct form - insurance forms are not transferrable . This is a veryserious topic ; as you would expect , in the event of a disastrous claim , the insurance company will review your policy form and follow the coverage and definitions to calculate whether or not you are insured and how to proceed with the claims handling . There is a link available providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy landlords insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow Professionals , Mortgage Professionals and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
In our `` perfect outcome '' world the owner of the rental property has every right to avoid assuming responsibility for the negligence of its tenants . Too often plaintiff 's lawyers seek deeper pockets for injuries real and alleged and when the tenant is found to be uncollectible the owner often gets stuck with the bill when a judgment needs to be paid . The property owner -LRB- landlord -RRB- is acting in a reasonable and prudent manner when they insist upon a tenant taking responsibility for their own liability and insurance needs by requiring evidence of insurance . If they did n't , it is n't unreasonable to presume that plaintiff counsel would argue that it is negligent on the party of the property owner not to expect or insist that a tenant have their own property and liability insurance as a condition of tenancy . The larger and more sophisticated the property owner the more likely they will have adopted risk management principles that require their tenants to have property and liability insurance as a condition of tenancy . It will become common practice in the years to come for almost every landlord to insist on evidence of insurance as a condition of tenancy . Financial prudence dictates the adoption of such a policy and I am aware of no law that prohibits a landlord from requiring proof of insurance coverage . And I go back to the original statement and assert that no landlord is wise to assume the responsibility for insuring the risk of the tenant and this is a risk that is clearly the responsibility of the tenant regardless of where they call home .
Landlords Insurance also known as Dwelling Fire Insurance can be deducted on your income taxes against rental income . Homeowners Insurance would be the incorrect policy form for a tenant occupied property ; please be very cautious not to be insured by the incorrect form of insurance . Each policy form is a legal contract inclusive of specific definitions setting the rules of coverage . A homeowners policy is to protect the insured home as the primary residence of the titled owner ; if this is not the case and you have a rental home , it should be covered by a Tenant Occupied Landlord Package policy and sometimes known as a Dwelling Fire policy . We provide an online format to obtain a quote and buyinsurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK
More than likely not . If there is mold damage in your apartment or the structure that you are renting and there is a claim to be filed . It would fall under the landlords building coverage . Not all carriers provide coverage for mold . To find out if there is coverage for mold within the landlord policy start by contacting the landlord and asking . They are the only ones that will be able to get a correct answer from their carrier as to whether or not they have this coverage within there policy .
In my experience , landlords , or their lawyers , require tenants to provide insurance for a number of reasons . First , it shows the tenant is prudent and responsible . Most will agree it is prudent and responsible for any residential or commercial tenant to maintain adequate property and liability insurance . Before most insurance companies issue an insurance policy , they screen potential insureds to make sure they are responsible citizens and have reasonably good credit . If someone is able to secure insurance coverage , a landlord would have some assurance the tenant has passed those tests . In addition , if a tenant 's negligence causes injury or damage to the landlord 's property or injury or damage to other tenants or guests in the building , the tenant may be ultimately responsible to indemnify the damaged parties . To have some assurance the tenant has the resources to back up that obligation , the landlord often requires the tenant secure specific amounts and types of insurance .
end question
start question
home-insurance
Does Homeowners Insurance Cover Dry Rot ?
The best way to look when filing a claim on your home is to ask this question . Was the damage sudden and/or accidental . Dry Rot is something that happens over a period of time and really falls on the homeowners as part of maintenance of his or her property . As we like to call , Pride of Ownership . So in other words dry rot is not a covered peril .
I am going to have to give you the boring insurance agent answer : You need to check your policy and the perils -LRB- cause of loss -RRB- too see if your policy does indeed cover the loss . There are many home insurance policies and I can not comment on your policy , coverage and so on . However , I will say in my opinion this is a maintenance isse and would not be covered on your home insurance policy . It does get frustrating as a homeowner because you can not see everything but we are still responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of our property . Heck I recently had a hail storm in my area and had to put in a claim on my home and found I had dry rot on some window frames and had to deal with this issue myself .
Homeowners Insurance in all States is designed to protect homes from covered perils which occur on a ` sudden and accidental basis ' . Termite damage does n't occur instantaneously ; it is something that deteriorates over time ; homes which are well maintained , inspected and treated against termites are highly unlikely to become infected or damaged . The same is true regarding dry rot , wet rot and slow and unrepaired water leaks . It is imperative for homes to be well maintained as homeowners insurance is not designed to provide monetary reimbursement for the ongoing upkeep and maintenance of homes ; if this were the case , premium would be much greater than what we pay today . Sudden and Accidental is true regarding any covered incident by the homeowners insurance policy ; covered perils will include for example items such as Fire , Wind , Hail , Water Damage , Burglary etc. . . Each of these items would occur suddenly and accidentally . There is a link providing an online format to obtain a quote and buy home insurance online in multiple States ; may be used by Escrow/Closing Professionals , Mortgage Professionals , Real Estate Agents and directly by Consumers . An exemplary online experience for all ! WEBSITELINK It would be a good idea to obtain a copy of your State 's Homeowners Insurance Form and ask a licensed insurance representative to review the policy form for you and highlight the paragraphs most pertinent to the specific situation . Homeowners insurance coverage forms are not often updated and it may only be necessary to review the main points once to understand the purpose of the policy and coverage afforded .
The best way to look when filing a claim on your home is to ask this question . Was the damage sudden and/or accidental . Dry Rot is something that happens over a period of time and really falls on the homeowners as part of maintenance of his or her property . As we like to call , Pride of Ownership . So in other words dry rot is not a covered peril .
If you own the house that is described in a homeowners policy there is coverage for the house located on the property , which includes additions and built-in parts and fixtures . There is also coverage for related private structures that are also on the described property which are not attached to the residence . When there is an occurrence that isnt expected or intended by the owner to the property there is coverage . This coverage means physical injury to tangible property and this includes the loss of use . Electrical wiring and fixtures are components of a residence and may be present in private structures located on the premises such as a pool shed or detached garage . When electrical work is required because of damage to the structure the electrical work becomes a covered expense . Policies differ as to which perils are covered . The most comprehensive form is called all risk . In this form any damage to the residence is covered except . The list isnt long ; however , flood and earthquake are at the top of the list . Electrical work poses another problem in that after damage has been sustained the repair work might fall under restrictions , codes , ordinances and law that were not in effect at the time of the original construction . The insurance company does not pay for the increased cost which results from the enforcement of these laws and codes . Some companies do not apply this to glass . Most companies offer a provision to cover these costs at an additional premium . The policy makes it clear that the company does not pay for damage that is the result of the neglect or the insured . It also does not pay for damage that is the result of power disruption . This means that if your loss is the result of the utility company failing to supply power , the resulting damage isnt covered . This is assuming that the actual damage is not on the covered premises . The insurance company does not pay for wear and tear . There are many ways to describe this damage that is sustained because the house was not maintained . Some of the issues that arise are deterioration , mechanical breakdown , rust , wet or dry rot , corrosion , mold , contamination or smog . The insurance company does not pay for electrical work that is the result of an act committed by or at the direction of the insured . In summary , if the electrical work required is the result of a fire or lightening , windstorm or hail , explosion , riot , aircraft , vehicles , sudden accidental damage by smoke , vandalism , theft , falling objects , weight of ice , snow or sleet , collapse of a building , sudden tearing apart , accidental discharge or overflow of liquids or steam from plumbing , heating or air-conditioning systems , or freezing , the policy will pay for repair of electrical components of the residence and other structures on the premises . If the electrical system needs repair as the result of other factors such as wear and tear , there isnt any coverage . The homeowners policy is designed to cover you when the unexpected occurs .
-- > Normal 0 Mold is a slow growing organism that forms on plants , food and other matter . You will find most property and liability insurance policies include an endorsement specifically limiting coverage for Fungi , Wet or Dry Rot or Bacteria . Mold damage used to be covered by property insurance policies , like homeowners policies , if it resulted from another covered loss . A few years ago , insurers slipped an exclusion into their policies for all types of mold loss but softened the impact by including a nominal amount -LRB- usually $ 10,000 -RRB- of coverage for mold damage to property and $ 50,000 for liability to others . Higher limits are usually available for an additional premium but most insurance buyers are not even aware of this option . Mold damage following a water damage loss or the breakdown of mechanical equipment could result in a serious loss . Increasing the mold coverage limits on homeowners , tenant-homeowners , dwelling and other property insurance policies should certainly be considered . This type of coverage , mold damage resulting from another covered loss , used to be free and was subject only to a policys limit . Now you have to pay for it and specific limits will apply but it remains an important insurance program consideration .
I am going to have to give you the boring insurance agent answer : You need to check your policy and the perils -LRB- cause of loss -RRB- too see if your policy does indeed cover the loss . There are many home insurance policies and I can not comment on your policy , coverage and so on . However , I will say in my opinion this is a maintenance isse and would not be covered on your home insurance policy . It does get frustrating as a homeowner because you can not see everything but we are still responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of our property . Heck I recently had a hail storm in my area and had to put in a claim on my home and found I had dry rot on some window frames and had to deal with this issue myself .
Dry rot would not typically be covered under a homeowners policy . This would normally be considered a maintenance issue for the homeowner . Remember every policy is different . Please read your policy completely to understand the coverage provided and any exclusions that there may be or contact your local agent to have them go over the policy with you .
In general , no , home insurance will not cover wet rot . A homeowners policy is there to protect you from the sudden and accidental , not the ongoing . To file a claim , you have to be able to pinpoint what happened and when it happened . Wet rot describes a long time , ongoing circumstance . Your homeowners policy is designed to make you whole after an `` occurrence '' . It 's not designed to maintain your home . If you have a condition that could , potentially , damage your home , it 's the homeowners responsibility to correct that condition to protect your home from future damage . This brings up the question of the cost of your homeowners insurance . Every claim impacts the loss ratio of your company and , ultimately , your rates . Want to control the cost of your homeowners insurance ? Take a higher deductible and pay for the smaller things yourself . You 'll save money in the long run .
Wood rot is something that occurs over a period of time . A loss must be sudden and/or accidental . Since wood rot would not occur suddenly this would fall under general maintenance and upkeep of a homeowner we often call pride of ownership . Any type of normal maintenance and/or wear and tear are not perils of a homeowners insurance policy . If you are not sure as to what caused the wood rot I always recommend to talk to your local agent about the potential loss .
Wood Rot does not fall under the category of sudden or accidental . Wood Rot would be a condition generally caused by a slow lead or drip of water which over time rots the wood . Since this was a long term condition that could of been dealt with had the leak or drip been fixed this would not be a covered loss .
-- > Normal 0 My response to that question would be a little different . Most homeowner and tenant-homeowner -LRB- Renter -RRB- type policies may cover certain types of damage to your property but most if not all will include a Water Damage exclusion . That exclusion says , in so many words , we dont cover you for a loss caused directly or indirectly by water damage . Then it defines water damage to include flood , surface water , overflow of a body of water , back up of sewers or drains , water which seeps or leaks through a foundation and a few other things . So I guess it would be fair to say if water is on the ground and somehow it gets into your home and causes damage , chances are pretty good your homeowners coverage will not cover it . Its also true ; you can purchase a separate government supported Flood insurance policy . But that Flood policy will only cover you for certain types of water damage . Flood policies define a flood only to mean an inundation of two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties , one of which is yours . So even if you have homeowners and flood insurance , there will still be certain types of water damage you wont be covered for . I support homeowners considering the purchase of flood insurance . Just make sure you know what this coverage is or is not going to do for you . Its not going to cover you for all types of ground water entering your home .
Homeowners policies contain a specific exclusion for the peril `` Flood '' . Flood is defined as , `` A flood is a general and temporary condition where two or more acres of normally dry land or two or more properties are inundated by water or mudflow . '' Maybe people confuse `` flood '' as a peril as compared to `` flooding '' of a basement or floor . If , for example , a pipe were to burst and `` flood '' the basement that would be a covered loss under a Standard HO-3 Homeowners Insurance Policy . It would cover the damage to the dwelling and your contents but not the cost to replace the pipe itself . Hope this helps
Mobile Home Insurance is the same concept as homeowner 's insurance for site-built homes ; however , the coverage is usually only provided by specialty companies for various reasons , which I will discuss infra . Mobile Home Insurance typically mirrors a homeowner 's policy in the fact that it has coverage for the dwelling , other structures , personal property , loss of use , personal/premises liability , and all the optional coverages such as identity theft , personal injury , etc. . Mobile Home insurance is usually only provided by specialty companies such as Foremost , American Modern , American Reliable , Aegis , etc. . Mobile homes present a unique loss exposure . Site-built homes are usually constructed much better than mobiles/manufactured homes , and site-built homes have a variety of fire-resistant materials used in them . Mobile homes , on the other hand , typically dry up fairly quickly ; and it is not unusual to see a small fire cause a total loss in a mobile over 15 years old , as the mobile has then become a tinderbox . Mobiles also can vary on the foundation , depending on local building codes . For instance , in California , mobiles are not subject to state building codes . So each county assessor 's office determines what qualifies as a `` permanent foundation . '' One county requires a full concrete perimeter foundation with earthquake retroffiting -LRB- i.e. bolting -RRB- , whereas another county will allow the homeowner to lay down a strip of gravel , stack some cinderblocks , and set the mobile on it . This inconsistency makes profitable underwriting somewhat challenging . It can be tricky purchasing mobile home insurance as many agents try to sell a depreciated value policy . Mobile homes are the one coverage that do not use `` replacement cost '' as determined by contractor labor plus materials to repair or replace . Replacement cost policies for mobile homes are based on the purchase price for a brand new mobile of like kind and quality plus transportation and installation . After 10 years of age or so , many mobile homeowners claim they would not want a new mobile anyway , they would go purchase a used one ; therefore , they do not buy replacement cost , they only buy depreciated value . While this can be a significant savings on your annual premium , the likelihood of a total loss is much higher in a mobile than in a site-built home ; and the danger is that you would only get paid $ 5,000 - $ 10,000 . Good luck purchasing one and transporting/installing it onto your property for that amount .
Restasis opthalmic eye drops is a steroid commonly used to treat severe dry eye . This type of dry eye is often -LRB- but not always -RRB- associated with Sjogren 's , an autoimmune disorder . Restasis is a covered medication under some Medicare Part D plans . Check your plan 's formulary . You can reduce your cost with manufacturers coupons , PAP 's and ordering by mail .
Great question ! If the tree fell due to negligence -LRB- it was dead , or had significant rot and was a hazard that was n't fixed -RRB- then whomever 's property it sat on may be liable for the damage to your car . If it was your tree , then your comprehensive coverage clause in your auto insurance policy should cover it . If it was a healthy tree that was felled by `` an act of God '' , you may have a rougher time collecting . If you have more questions , feel free to contact me , I 'd be happy to help ! Thanks for asking !
From me , of course . If you are like most Americans shopping for health insurance is not only about as exciting as watching paint dry but you also find yourself in a world you do n't fully understand and where the people seem to speak a foreign language . Of course , you can always go online and shop around or , even more fun , go to HealthCare.Gov or your state 's health insurance marketplace and shop there . That works for some people but millions of others have learned the painful lesson that there are a lot of factors to consider when making a purchase as important as health insurance that are very difficult to present concisely on a web site . Seek out the services of a qualified life and health insurance agent . An independent agent not tied to one specific insurance company can shop the entire marketplace for you and can be impartial . An agent with additional professional certifications such as Chartered Benefits Consultant , Certified Employee Benefits Consultant , Registered Health Underwriter are examples of professionals who have taken their education and training beyond the simple requirements to get a life and health insurance license . These are the characteristics I would recommend you look for in a health insurance agent . It does n't cost you anything extra to get these professional 's services and they do all the work , can answer your questions , and point out those not so obvious issues with provider networks , how your specific medical and/or prescription needs are covered by different plans that the average consumer often misses or does n't even know to ask about . ObamaCare has not made all health insurance policies equal , quite the opposite in fact . Ask your friends or co-workers , do an Internet search for health insurance agents , or contact me . But you 'll be glad that you got professional guidance on this matter .
Your regular health insurance plan may cover corrective lenses -LRB- glasses , contacts -RRB- in some situations . Cataracts are typically covered by health insurance . Surgical intervention to correct cataracts is normally covered as are the `` special '' eyeglasses that some former cataract patients wear . Other medical conditions of the eye , such as Sjogren 's -LRB- an autoimmune disease that can affect the eye -RRB- may require the individual to wear special eyewear such as goggles to prevent air from hitting the eye and drying it out even further .
A renters policy provides coverage for damage that is the result of a covered peril . Since there is a wide variety of forms this can not be answered for every case , however , most policies list windstorm or hail right after fire and lightning . These are the fundamental coverages contained in most policies . The coverage has some limitations . The company will normally not pay for loss to property inside a structure , caused by dust , rain , sand , sleet , snow or water , all whether driven by wind or not , which enter through an opening not made by the direct force of wind or hail . The company is not likely to pay for the loss to watercraft and their trailers unless inside a fully enclosed building . Smaller water craft normally have coverage . If your property damage is subject to ordinance or law , such as a connection for an appliance , there might be a limitation on the increased cost of replacement that comes because of that law or ordinance . If the hurricane causes landslides or erosion , damage to your personal property arising from that movement of land might not be covered either . The same is true if the damage comes from flood water or tidal waves . This exclusion applies whether it is caused by wind or not . If the hurricane interrupts power supply the insurance company probably will deny coverage on any loss that result from that cause , for example rotting food in a freezer . If you are running a business out of your apartment , the company will probably exclude any loss that comes from that business to include interruption because there isnt power or people can not reach your apartment . The chances are quite good that if a hurricane strikes your apartment , that your renters policy will replace your property up to the limits of the policy . This is when you find out how good your coverage is . If you have appropriate limits you could be fully restored , minus the deductible . It is very important to have the correct limits for coverage on your renters policy . To make sure that you have adequate coverage take a picture of everything that you own inside your apartment . Then make a chart showing the property and the estimated cost of replacing the property . When you add up that list you will have the amount of coverage you should set as a limit for your policy . The pictures and estimates should be stored off-site in case that hurricane becomes a reality . Hurricanes often result in a loss of life . While that might seem remote , this might be a good time to consider what will happen to those that you leave behind . A quick inventory of debts would be a good thing to have handy . If you can eliminate debts and pay for final expenses you would be a great help to those that you love . Every weekend we see people on street corners seeking donations or offering car wash services so they can pay the expenses for a loved one . It is sad but it can be avoided with just a small amount of planning .
This is really a question you need to ask yourself . In my opinion the reason to sell life insurance is because you believe in the product . If you ask me personally life insurance is one of the most important insurance coverage 's a person can have . There are two reasons for a person to have life insurance . 1 -RRB- if you owe somebody . 2 -RRB- if you love somebody . It is a sad , sad thing to see the bread winner of a family pass on with no life insurance and leave the spouse and children hi and dry . If your in it just for the money your in it for the wrong reasons
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Do You Get Life Insurance ?
To get life insurance , you first must determine what type of policy you want , and how much coverage you need . Sometimes people come to us with this all figured out , then find out that they do not qualify for that type of policy , or can not afford the face amount they have chosen . Therefore , it can be helpful to bring your financial data to your agent and work that out together . Once you decide what type of policy you want to apply for , the next step depends on the product you chose . If you want to apply for No Exam policy , you may be able to fill out a digital application and have your policy in effect within a few days . If you apply for a medically underwritten policy , you will first complete a fairly lengthy application . Some people choose to do this on their own , some with their agent , or others do it via phone interview with the life insurance company . Medically underwritten policies require taking an exam in your home or other place of your choice . This is usually done by a local paramed company . The insurance company may also order medical records from your doctors . Once the underwriter has all the required medical information , he/she will approve your policy at the rate for which you qualify . You accept your policy by signing some delivery paperwork and paying the first premium . You have a free look period to decide if you want to keep it . Once it is in effect , no one can take your life insurance policy away from you , as long as you continue to pay premiums in a timely manner .
You should work with an independent life insurance agent/broker to help you secure a policy . There are many moving parts to life insurance and many companies to compare . We can work with you to determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and how long you should have the premium guarantees for -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- . Identifying which carrier will work best for your program can be a difficult path to navigate . The risk class a carrier assigns to your program is one of the most critical parts of life insurance -LRB- the risk class determines the premiums - the better the risk class , the lower the premiums and vice versa -RRB- . The risk class is determined by your medical history -LRB- and an exam for most programs -RRB- . It 's important to remember that every carrier has their own underwriting guidelines . Therefore , company ABC may offer you preferred plus , while company XYZ may offer you preferred -LRB- requiring higher premiums -RRB- .
You should work with an independent life insurance agent/broker to help you secure a policy . There are many moving parts to life insurance and many companies to compare . We can work with you to determine how much coverage is suitable to your needs and how long you should have the premium guarantees for -LRB- e.g. term vs. permanent -RRB- . Identifying which carrier will work best for your program can be a difficult path to navigate . The risk class a carrier assigns to your program is one of the most critical parts of life insurance -LRB- the risk class determines the premiums - the better the risk class , the lower the premiums and vice versa -RRB- . The risk class is determined by your medical history -LRB- and an exam for most programs -RRB- . It 's important to remember that every carrier has their own underwriting guidelines . Therefore , company ABC may offer you preferred plus , while company XYZ may offer you preferred -LRB- requiring higher premiums -RRB- . If you would like assistance with your life insurance needs , send me a private message by clicking on the `` contact me '' button under my profile picture or visit my website , www.TermInsuranceBrokers.com , for information -LRB- you can run instant quotes as well - we 're licensed in many states across the country -RRB- .
You can obtain Life Insurance in several ways as easy as going online to purchase . The way I would best recommend is speaking to someone who has knowledge and background in the industry . You are going to want to have an analysis of your personal situation so that all things can be taken into consideration . When making a choice please make sure that you purchase a policy with Living Benefits built into the policy . Do n't purchase the kind of life insurance you have to die to use .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
Do you know what you want ? Are you sure ? A good agent can help answer all your questions and assist you in knowing how and what to decide . That is a major functions of a quality Life Insurance Agent . They are trained to gather the facts from you and make recommendations for you to select from . Do you want Whole Life or Term ? Do you know the difference ? How much coverage do you need ? Do you really know how to determine that ? How do you select beneficiaries ? If they are minors do you know how to ensure the money goes to them and not to Probate Court ? These are the types of things I can help you with .
How much money do you need in retirement ? How much money do you have to save to get your income for retirement ? How many years do you have until you retire ? How much money do you want to save in income taxes ? Does your retirement plan have early withdrawal fees ? If you do n't know any answers to some of these questions than i think it 's fair to say that you should talk with an adviser , someone who can give you expert retirement advice . There are many savings vehicles that can give you a tax free retirement .
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
That really depends on your current situation . Are you married ? Do you have children ? A mortgage ? Do you support your parents ? If you were n't around any more , how difficult would it be for your family to survive ? One way to look at how much life insurance to get is to figure out how much of your income your family needs each month -LRB- include things that you do that they may now have to hire people for -RRB- and how long they will need it . -LRB- For instance until your kids are through school -RRB- . That is how much life insurance you need .
Is long term care insurance really necessary ? The answer depends on you and what you want to happen to you in a care situation . If you want a say in where you go , how you are treated and what you get to keep asset wise , Long Term Care makes great sense . You can certainly do without it , but understand you give up where you go , how you 're treated and very little if any choice in assets you get to keep . All a long term care policy does is give you control over how you 're treated when you need a care situation . So no , it is not necessary if that does n't matter to you . If it does , then it makes great sense . Long term care is an either you get it or you do n't product . Most purchasers of long term care WANT the product , very few have to be talked into making a purchase . It is one the few products in insurance where you spend a lot of time plugging together options for people as they 've already decided to purchase , so the question becomes what do they want it to do ?
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
Yes you can apply for life insurance online . The life insurance industry is going through a very trying transition right now . The average career life insurance agent right now is over 50 years of age and the total number of agents is quickly declining . This is happening because more people like you are looking for life insurance online . The important thing for anyone who is a just starting the life insurance process to consider is that your buying experience will certainly be very different if you buy life insurance online versus contacting a local agent . Not better or worse , but different . Thinking about how you prefer to do business may help you decide which route to take . Are you part of the connected generation ? If your average day includes texting and Skype or FaceTime you will be perfectly comfortable buying your life insurance online . Do n't be concerned that you will be stuck with some impersonal call center . There are plenty of great online insurance agents that provide personal service . The only difference between them and your local agent is that your communication will be via your smart phone , not in person . If you 're not into the latest technology and you feel that personal interaction requires a handshake , you probably wo n't be comfortable getting life insurance online . You may find the process cold and impersonal . Do n't worry . Even though they 're getting older , there are plenty of great local life insurance agents that will give you advice and personal service your way . Many of them still make house calls and transact business over your kitchen table . The most important thing is not where you get life insurance , it 's that you do get life insurance . Good luck to you whichever route you choose :-RRB-
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
There are several things to consider when purchasing life insurance . The first is insurable interest . Who stands to lose financially if you died today ? A spouse , children , loved one or even business partner ? Who would be left owing your debt or who depends upon your income ? Once you answer this question , next is how much is needed to satisfy this debt or income replacement ? Now how long would it take to cover this loss ? In other words , how long do you need to repay that debt or how long until your partner or loved one could earn their own income ? Once you have the answers to these questions it will become clear how much life insurance you need and how long do you need to carry it . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker that can shop the market to find you the best coverage at the best price to cover your unique situation .
That is a great question ! And an interesting one . I guess the answer depends upon how long you 've had the policy , and how well you 've kept track of it ; or whether it is a good policy to get at all , if I 'm reading into your question rightly . Here 's what I advise people . A UL policy can be a good thing if you are somebody that keeps an eye on everything , and has extra money lying around . You also have to have a healthy risk tolerance . Agents will rightly tell you that this type of policy can bring great returns , but press them hard , and make them tell you exactly what stars and moons need to align for that to happen . What is the actual performance of the policy over time , not the best case scenario printed in the sales brochure ? How much over the minimum payment is required to achieve that performance ? That 's what you need to know if you are thinking of purchasing one . If you already have one , are you paying attention to how well it is still funded ? You could be in for a surprise if you have n't . Call your agent , and get an idea of how it 's doing for you , and how long you can expect it to be in force . Functionally , you can use the proceeds for everything that you would any other whole life insurance policy . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
What is the best Whole Life Policy ? While there is no direct answer to this , the best answer is whatever policy will best protect your family . There are different types of whole life policies . The most common is ordinary whole life , also called `` straight Life '' or `` Permanent '' -LRB- cash value -RRB- Insurance . You pay a level premium for the rest of your life , as long as you are making your monthly premiums . The premium never increases and your policy accumulates cash value . How much life insurance -LRB- death benefit -RRB- will you need ? That determines on a number of factors such as : Do you have any children/grandchildren you want to leave money to ? How much of your income does your spouse depend on ? Who depends on you financially ? How much debt do you owe ? Do you want to leave money to your favorite charity ? You want to make sure you buy enough life insurance to cover your financial obligations if an unexpected or untimely death occurs . It is also important your premium fit 's within your budget . Because if you ca n't afford it , it is n't any good for you or your family . An insurance agent is the best person to get with to compare the different types of life insurance and find a policy that best suits your situation . I work with many top insurance carriers with the most competitive rates . I 'll do the shopping for you ! Thank you & Be Well , Mendy Douglas www.iflretirement.com/mendy-douglas/
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
end question
start question
life-insurance
Does Life Insurance End Up Going Through Probate ?
Not usually . As long as the policy has a named beneficiary who is alive when the insured dies the proceeds will normally skip the probate process . If there are no living beneficiaries when the insured dies , then the proceeds are paid to the insured 's estate at which time the funds would need to go through the probate process in order to be distributed to heirs . Keep in mind that proceeds paid to a deceased beneficiary could end up in that beneficiary 's estate and would need to go through the probate process in order for that beneficiary 's heirs to receive the proceeds .
Life insurance does not go into probate if the beneficiary is a person , trust or entity other than the estate . If the beneficiary is the estate , if all beneficiaries are deceased , or if there is no beneficiary named on the policy , the insurance proceeds will be paid to probate court , where fees will be deducted . Life insurance with a designated beneficiary avoids all that .
Video Transcript : Today 's question is , Does life insurance go through probate ? Generally , when a policy insured dies , he or she has beneficiaries . Those beneficiaries generally see the proceeds direct to them , bypassing probate . I love this because those proceeds then generally , by the way absolutely tax free , go to their beneficiaries without having the interference or going through the steps of probate . What that means is that that money , when it comes direct , the beneficiaries can use that money as they see fit . So there 's no dictate from probate how it 's done , how it 's used , or that it has to go through state probate first . It generally goes to the beneficiaries , and then they can use that to pay off indebtedness or to put money aside for future obligations . And that 's why I like it , because its one of the perks of life insurance . It generally goes directly to beneficiaries and not through probate .
Not usually . As long as the policy has a named beneficiary who is alive when the insured dies the proceeds will normally skip the probate process . If there are no living beneficiaries when the insured dies , then the proceeds are paid to the insured 's estate at which time the funds would need to go through the probate process in order to be distributed to heirs . Keep in mind that proceeds paid to a deceased beneficiary could end up in that beneficiary 's estate and would need to go through the probate process in order for that beneficiary 's heirs to receive the proceeds .
Life insurance does not usually go through probate . If it is left to a person , charity , or group , it bypasses probate . However , if the beneficiary is the estate , or if all the beneficiaries are deceased , the proceeds of the policy will go to the estate , and thus , go through probate .
Life insurance does not go to probate unless the beneficiary on the policy is the estate . If there are no living beneficiaries at the time of the death of the Insured person , the life insurance can also go to probate . If the policy 's beneficiary is a person or trust , the life insurance proceeds do not need to go through probate in most circumstances .
Does life insurance need to be probated ? No life insurance does not have to go through probate if a stated beneficiary is named within the policy . Life insurance bypasses probate in most situations . A person can name their estate as beneficiary if they so choose putting the money inside the estate to be broken up and divided according to the will . OR they can simply have named beneficiaries to which the insurance company distributes funds .
Life inusrance policies have designated beneficaries , so itdoes n't go through probate . Unassigtned assets generally go through probate . Qualified retirment plans also have assigned beneciaires , so those assets also by pass probate . It 's important to consult with an estate or probate attorney before retitling ownership or the reassignment of any beneficaries .
Always consult a probate attorney before assuming what assets bypass or go through probate . For the most part non-qualified annuities should by pass probate . The state of residence may have differing rules of engagement on their proprietary probate procedures . Keep in mind that the annuity may be owner driven or annuitant driven , which can dictate the how the annuity is processed through probate .
No , an annuity does not usually go through probate . As a life insurance product , annuities designate a beneficiary on the policy , and if the annuitant dies , the money from the annuity goes to that person . Like life insurance , the money does not go through probate when left to a person as beneficiary . Contact a tax consultant for more information and different scenarios .
Life insurance proceeds can go the estate of the insured on purpose or by accident but there is no reason they should . Naming a beneficiary and reviewing periodically is usually the right thing to do . If the estate is the beneficiary , the access of the heirs to any money associated with the life insurance policy is delayed because the money must go through probate . Probate may , in some cases , cause a delay of a year or more . Life insurance proceeds left to the estate , like any asset left to the estate , are forced through the probate process and therefore become part of the public record , so privacy is lost . Perhaps most importantly , in most states , the money paid into probate becomes subject to the claims of creditors of the estate .
is life insurance part of a will ? In most cases NO , as life insurance is a separate thing that works outside of probate and a will . Life insurance pays to a stated beneficiary directly , it does n't need to go through probate or be included in a will . That said , you can make the will your beneficiary and put it through probate if you so choose .
Life insurance that is left to a person as beneficiary does not have to go through probate . A check is sent to the beneficiary shortly after the death claim and certified death certificate are sent to the life insurance insurance company . On the other hand , if the estate is set up as the beneficiary , or if the beneficiaries stated on the policy are not alive at the time of the death of the insured person , the proceeds would go to the estate and then , through probate .
The death benefit is usually income tax free to the beneficiary . The reason why I say usually is because there are a few circumstances where the benefit would be taxable . If the death benefit is paid out in installment payments and is gaining interest , the beneficiary would have to pay taxes on the interest earned . The beneficiary of a life insurance policy receives a lump sum of money from the insurance company that is not included as income . The applicant does not pay any taxes on their premium payments as well . Life insurance also skips probate court . Probate court is the court that deals with distribution of assets after one passes . Most individuals have their assets tied up in probate from six months to over two years . Walt Disney passed away in 1966 his estate is still in probate . Nobody has access to the individuals estate until it has gone through the probate court . Life insurance bypasses the probate process and goes to the beneficiary income tax free in most cases .
Life insurance proceeds generally do not have to go through probate unless they are left to the estate . If the beneficiary is listed on the policy as `` estate '' , or if the persons who were listed as beneficiaries are no longer alive , then the life insurance proceeds will go through probate . If the proceeds are left to a living person , they will be paid to that person directly , bypassing probate .
Term life insurance may end at the end of the term , or it may go up in price at the end of the term . The end of the term is the period when the guaranteed premium ends . E.g. . If you buy a ten year term policy , the policy will end or the premium will go up at the start of year 11 . Because the premiums go up so high , most people do end their term policies when the term ends . However , if there is a provision for the premium to go up -LRB- called annually renewable -RRB- , it can go up to whatever age the policy dictates . Some are annually renewable as high as age 90 . Another option offered for many term policies is to convert the policy to permanent insurance . This must be done before the term ends . Again , the price per thousand dollars of coverage is much higher for the new policy than it was for the term policy . However , it is a good option if you can not qualify for new insurance , and you may be able to take a smaller face amount to keep the premium affordable .
Dave Ramsey 's concept is that you should buy term and invest the difference . Since term insurance is less expensive initially , investing the difference in cost between term insurance and whole life insurance you will receive a greater return . In principle and theory he is right . In actual practice , statistics show that people buy term with this in mind but do not follow through on the investment portion . The result is that people are left with no insurance in their later years , because term insurance premiums increase in later years and become unaffordable . Often they end up with less savings than they would have had if they had purchased whole life . When you consider the tax friendliness of whole life , probate avoidance , and other factors Whole Life often in reality comes out on top . Dave Ramsey 's concept is not new , it has been around since A.L. Williams in the early 1980 's . Unless a person is extremely disciplined and has enough liquid cash flow , the concept of buy term and invest the difference has historically not worked for most people . Life happens , emergencies come up , expenses rise and the investment part of the plan is put on the back burner . I know some of my colleagues will disagree with me . They point to numbers on illustrations that look good in theory . I am not saying the concept wo n't work . I am pointing out the reality that unless a person truly follows through on the plan , historically it has n't for many . I see too many people end up with no insurance in their later years when they need it most . You should have at least a solid base of Whole Life . Life Insurance is not a good investment in fact it is not an investment . It is a good semi-compulsory way to save money for a later date while at the same time providing an immediate estate should you die too soon .
No , a persons life insurance benefits or proceeds are paid directly to the beneficiary . They are not subject to a will or probate . These are two totally different types of end of life events . The exception to this rule would be if the beneficiary is a trust which is controlled by the will . Also , if the life insurance policy primary beneficiary dies prior to the insured and there are no contingent beneficiaries named , then the death proceeds would be left to the insureds estate and the benefits would go through probate court and subject to the wishes spelled out in the will .
In a very general sense , Louisiana does not tax life insurance benefits if left to a beneficiary who is not the estate . If the beneficiary is the estate , or life insurance proceeds end up in the estate because there was no living beneficiary listed on the policy , then the money will go through probate and subject to taxes and fees .
Creditors can not reach life insurance proceeds to pay off the debts of the deceased insured person unless the beneficiary of the policy was not a person . I.e. . If the insured named his/her `` estate '' as the beneficiary , then the policy proceeds go through probate , giving creditors for the deceased , access to those funds . If the beneficiary is a person , the life insurance proceeds do not usually go through probate , but directly to that person . Creditors can not reach the money that went to the beneficiary unless the beneficiary shared the debt with the deceased .
end question
start question
auto-insurance
About How Much Is Auto Insurance ?
Auto insurance is priced based on the auto , your driving history , garage zip code and credit rating . Need a no obligation quote ? I will be happy to run different options in order to get you the most insurance protection based on what you tell me you are able to afford . Call me Keith Prim - Dallas - 214-435-0791
A Personal Auto Policy -LRB- PAP -RRB- generally comes with five coverages included in the premium . 1 . Auto Liability ... protects you from claims other people make against you arising from auto accidents 2 . Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability -LRB- UIM -RRB- ... protects you for claims you make against other drivers who do not have insurance or do not have enough insurance 3 . Medical Payments ... pays money to doctors and hospitals for your medical expenses arising out of auto accidents 4 . Collision ... pays for damage to your car arising out of auto accidents where you collide with another car or object , like a tree . 5 . Comprehensive ... pays for damage to your car arising out accidents that are other than collision , for example , flood , fire and theft . When you ask , `` How Much Auto Insurance Do I Need ? '' , I 'm assuming you mean # 1 , Auto Liability so I 'll limit my answer to that coverage . In subsequent postings , I 'll answer how much you need for the other coverages . So , how much Auto Liability Insurance do you need ? It depends . If you just want to get on the road and be legal about it , in New Jersey , the minimum limit of insurance is $ 35,000 for each accident . You are also required to purchase Uninsured/Underinsured Motorists Liability and Medical Payments and they also have minimum limit requirements . Other states have similar minimum limit requirements and they are spelled out at each state 's insurance department website . Minimum limit policies will get you on the road , but they are not a smart use of your dollars . Consider an auto accident where you strike a Lawyer 's Mercedes ... his new Mercedes . Think $ 35,000 will take care of everything ? I would n't bet on it . And if $ 35,000 is not enough , you 'll pay personally for a long time . Now , if your primary goal is adequate protection for you , your family and your assets , you need to take a step back . Liability claims against you arising out of the use of an auto is one area you should be concerned about . You should also be concerned about liability claims arising out of owning a home , operating a boat or a motorcycle or an RV . Liability claims can also arise from owning vacation property . You can trigger a claim . Your spouse can trigger a claim and your children can trigger a claim . Considering all the people in your life who can trigger a claim and all the ways they can do it , How much is enough liability insurance ? How much should you buy ? Answer : I do n't know . But I do know EVERY smart insurance consumer , concerned about `` how much insurance is enough ? '' should purchase a $ 1 million Personal Umbrella Policy . A Personal Umbrella Policy is a secondary policy . Your auto policy , homeowner policy , boat policy , and so on are all primary policies . Each primary policy has its own limit of insurance . In the event of an accident -LRB- in the home , in the car or on the water -RRB- , you have a primary policy to protect you . If the amount of primary insurance is not enough to pay a claim , the Personal Umbrella policy adds a million dollar cushion . Is a Personal Umbrella policy expensive ? No . A million dollar umbrella GENERALLY starts around $ 125 . That 's $ 125 for $ 1,000,000 of liability protection you can use over your auto insurance or your homeowner insurance or your boat insurance and so on and so on . If there is a better deal in the insurance business , I 'm not aware of it . Now if you 're sold on the idea that a Personal Umbrella Policy has merit , we need to return to your original question : `` How much Auto Liability Insurance do I need ? '' You need an amount of insurance that satisfies the minimum requirements of the Personal Umbrella Policy . For example , if your Personal Umbrella Policy requires you have a $ 300,000 Personal Auto Liability Limit , that 's what you need to buy for your auto policy . If the requirement is $ 300,000 and you have $ 250,000 , there will be a $ 50,000 gap in the event of a serious claim . Again , for example , you 're responsible for a serious auto accident . It ends up costing $ 600,000 . Your auto policy will pay $ 250,000 , you 'll have to pay $ 50,000 and then the umbrella will pay the remaining $ 300,000 . So you can see , you need to buy the correct amount of auto and home insurance and the correct amount for any other primary policy so you do n't have a gap in coverage . Can you buy a Personal Umbrella Policy with a limit higher than $ 1 million ? You can , but the higher the limit , the greater the scrutiny . I hope I 've answered your question , but if I have n't , feel free to call , fax or email me .
The cost of life insurance can range from a few dollars per month to many thousands per month . The real question is how much would it cost you to get the proper policy for your situation . In order to find that out you need to first determine how much death benefit you need . The best way to calculate how much life insurance you need is by doing a comprehensive needs analysis . If you are looking for a quick rule-of-thumb , we recommend you carry at least ten times your annual income in life insurance . The second factor is how long do you think you will need the coverage . You might want life insurance to cover your mortgage which will be paid off in a certain period of time , or you might want life insurance just until your children are grown and self supporting . Maybe you want to have life insurance for whenever you die , be it next year or when you 're 90 . The third key factor is your budget . You might like the idea of a large permanent life insurance policy , but the premium may simply be more than you can reasonably afford . So in order to determine how much life insurance costs per month , you need to figure out how much life insurance you need , how long you need it and what your budget allows . By going through this process you can determine how much the proper life insurance policy for you will cost .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There was a time when it was much less but in many cases the auto were not rated correctly for the business use and also at that time the liability did not extend to other autos driven . Now days it cost more but there is a good reason for that if you are having a commercial auto policy your limits usually are much higher more like $ 1 million in liability limits or higher . Most personal auto policies do not have that high of limits . Now you can have a personal auto with Business use on it which will make your personal auto a little more expensive But it really depends on the type of business and the use . If you have your business name pained on your personal auto then this would not be a good fit for a personal auto policy . Each carrier has VERY specific guideline just like a pizza delivery driver needs a commercial auto policy most carriers on a personal auto would not cover you if you were doing that type of work and had personal auto coverage only . Talk to your agent and make sure that you are covered correctly each carrier and state has it 's own rules and rates make sure yours is rated as it should be .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An experienced life insurance broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario . Please feel free to contact me for help and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The General is a nonstandard auto insurance company , so you should only consider The General if you do n't qualify for standard auto insurance , due to your driving record or other factors . Like with any auto insurance company , some drivers in some states or zip codes may find The General has the best price for them , but other people may find much lower rates with other nonstandard auto insurance companies . Compare The General with GEICO , Progressive , Infinity , andlocal independent insurance agents selling nonstandard auto insurance near you . Check your phone book : agents sellingnonstandard auto insurance usually advertise about insuring people with no prior insurance , needing SR-22s , or havingtickets and/or accidents .
This varies for each person . A lot of variables go into the calculation of determining how much life insurance you need , how long you need it , and what is an appropriate amount to actually secure . A life insurance calculator can help with this . A few things to get you started when calculating out what you need and how long you need it for are : 1 -RRB- Do you have a mortgage ? If so , how much is left on it and how many more years do you have to go until it 's paid off ? 2 -RRB- Any final expenses you want paid off -LRB- e.g. burial expenses , credit card debt , medical bills -RRB- ? 3 -RRB- Education expenses for you or a family member you want to pay off -LRB- such as college tuition -RRB- 4 -RRB- Income replacement - this is a big one ! A question to think about here is how much income would be needed if you died today and how long would your family need it to maintain their current lifestyle . An insurance agent/broker can help you with this and make it a much smoother , easier process . One thing to also note , a lot of people think `` once i 'm retired , I wo n't need life insurance anymore so I can just buy term insurance and let it go when I retire '' - there are many many many reasons why you should have life insurance during your retirement years . For example , if you 're receiving a retirement pension and you die , the pension income may stop and not continue onto your spouse -LRB- if you chose the pension max option over the survivorship option when you started receiving benefits -RRB- - this can also apply to social security income . That 's just one scenario .
Direct auto insurance is not a type of auto insurance , but a way to buy or method of selling auto insurance . Some auto insurance companies , like USAA & Amica , do not have insurance agents representing them , and sell auto insurance -LRB- and other types of insurance -RRB- direct to the public only . Auto insurance companies selling direct to the public staff call centers with licensed insurance representatives employed by the company , to sell and service the company 's insurance products . Although I think most people benefit from receiving the personal service of an agent , accountable to the customer for providing customer service , advice , and assistance , both USAA & Amica have excellent reputations for claims & customer service . Companies like GEICO & Progressive are known for selling direct to the public , though GEICO has agents available in many large metropolitan areas , and Progressive also sells through independent insurance agents , though the products and rates will be different than buying direct . When you call a company selling direct for an auto insurance quote , you speak with a company employee licensed to sell insurance , working from a call center , most likely out-of state -LRB- but not outside of the USA -RRB- . If you buy the auto insurance policy , there is no one person at the company responsible for your account , as there would be , if you purchased a policy through an agent . So , a company employee sells you the auto insurance policy , but if you call back with a question , or to make a policy change liking adding or removing a car , whichever employee answering the phone will help you , much like you receive help when you call your cable TV company . GEICO & Progressive seem to compete on price more than other companies , but buying direct does not always mean a better price . Selling direct mean no agent commissions to pay , but selling direct has other costs , like more marketing costs for TV & media ads , employee salaries and benefits . A wise auto insurance shopper decides on the coverage they need , then check the rates of all the major auto insurance companies in their state , regardless of whether the company sells direct , through their own local agents , or through independent insurance agents .
That 's a great question , first the retirement planner should be able to walk you through the 4 phases . 1 . Contribution 2 . Accumulation 3 . distribution 4 . transfer . Each phase is critical for you financial future . Here are some questions they should ask you , What age do you see yourself retiring example - -LRB- current age 30 , retirement age 65 -RRB- , that gives you 35 years until you retire . Next is how much money do you think you need when you retire example -LRB- you need 30,000 income -RRB- . How much money do you need to save to receive $ 30,000 a year ? Example -LRB- $ 1,000,000 saved with a 3 % withdrawal will give you your $ 30,000 -RRB- Now how much money will you have to save to have $ 1,000,000 saved in 35 years . How much of a rate of return will you earn on your money and how will it compound to in 35 years . You also have to factor in taxes , inflation , rate of return , and how much debt you accumulate . This should give you a start in finding a great adviser like our company .
The largest insurers of private passenger vehicles in the USA , in order by US market share , are State Farm , GEICO , Allstate , Progressive , and Farmers Insurance Group . However , the top five companies will vary by state . For example , American Family Insurance is the company with the largest auto insurance market share in Wisconsin . Each state 's auto insurance market is unique . The top five companies in terms of US auto insurance market share are large national companies available in most US states . However , regional insurance companies often have large market share in certain states , like Commerce Insurance in Massachusetts . So , the important auto insurance companies will depend on where you live . The companies with the largest market shares do not necessarily make them the best companies for you . Progressive & GEICO continue to have large gains in market share over recent years , which may be a sign they have lower rates than competitors . Some of the best companies can be smaller regional companies . For example , companies like Erie & Auto-owners usually score higher than many other companies in annual JD Power auto customer satisfaction & auto claims satisfaction studies . The best thing you can do is read reviews & check the ratings of all the major auto insurance companies in your state , and compare their coverage , service , and rates . People really can find a better auto insurance company with much lower rates , if they shop with enough companies .
There are two ways to measure whether an auto insurance policy is cheap . From the television advertisements you could think that the premium is the way to determine who has the cheapest insurance . Your state insurance commissioner is charged to make sure that insurance companies keep their promises . He does this by making sure that the premiums being charged are adequate . Since all insurance companies doing business in your state are offering their policies to the same group of people , it would seem that ultimately they would have pretty similar experience and would charge fairly similar rates . When you hear an advertisement telling you that customers saved on average 25 % by switching to company A , you need to understand that information like that is the result of after sales surveys . This is what people report . That is why almost every insurance company has similar advertisements . If everyone is saving money over everyone else , something isnt quite right . The other way to determine cheap insurance is to determine by value . You buy automobile insurance to pay claims when you have an accident or your car is damaged . When this occurs how much you paid in premium may be insignificant if the policy you hold on your automobile is inadequate to handle the law suits coming your way not to mention the repair of your vehicle . A few days ago a client was struck a glancing blow on the right rear of his car while stopped at a signal light . The car then proceeded to hit the expensive car stopped alongside my clients , pushing that car into a small car with two children on board which then rolled forward and knocked over and ran over a motorcycle operator . The driver who started this mayhem is not thinking about how much he paid in premiums , he is thinking about how much the company is going to pay in the costs that will come next . Incidentally , two people left the scene in ambulances and others were undoubtable injured . The way to have the cheapest automobile insurance is to secure the services of a competent insurance agent . The agent will listen to you , provide sound financial advice and communicate clearly with you and with the insurance company . In the end the agent will guide you to appropriate limits . These limits will determine how well the insurance company performs when you have an accident . Regardless of which company the agent and you agree upon , the real test is going to be how well the company performs when you have an accident . There are two other fallacies that affect an automobile insurance purchase . The first is the idea of legal limits . If you purchase automobile on the basis of the limits required by law you may well bankrupt yourself when you have an accident . Those limits can handle some accidents but certainly will stop paying long before the bills stopping coming if the accident involves much personal injury or the car struck is expensive . The other fallacy is full coverage . Most consider full coverage to be enough to satisfy the state requirement and enough to satisfy the lender . While keeping those entities satisfied you are still assuming too much exposure personally . Your company could run out of money before everyone is satisfied . Then they will sue you directly .
There really is n't a right answer for this , there is only your answer for you . There are numerous software programs that you can plug into and it will spit out a number and you can choose to follow that program . Is it correct or exact ? Unfortunately the anwer is yes , no or maybe depending on the individual . I tend to individualize my approach to `` how much life insurance I need ? '' when thinking about how much coverage to get . The first or base level of coverage I consider is simply this `` if I did n't wake up tomorrow , how much money would put things at $ 0 . ? '' This is my starting point or minimum level of coverage I would consider . From there , I would start adding based on answers to questions posed like ; Does my spouse work ? Would extra money help in a transition to work ? How old are my children ? Do I want to have something for college set aside for them ? Who can do for my family what I can do if something breaks and I 'm not there ? What would that cost ? If the main person who does the childcare passes , how much would I need to help with that cost ? You can look at your own situation and bring different questions and costs to the mix too ! Then much like the purchase of lumber for a project you figure the amount plus 10 % extra for just in case . This may be why some just say 5X income or 10X income as answers . The assumption is all those questions would be answered and then some . The big thing is do n't let what ever number you come up with discourage you from getting life insurance . Some is always , always better than none .
This is an outstanding question ! It goes to the heart of how best to protect your family , and sort through all of the choices out there . It can be scary trying to figure out who has the ` best deal ' and since most people do n't understand a lot about insurance , how not to get taken . I think it is fair to say also that people do n't have a high opinion of insurance to begin with , so agents are n't seemingly much better . So why not just choose a policy from an on-line company or name brand company ? Here 's what I 'd say to you . I have always done business as much by my feel for the person as by their product . If my server does n't care about me or my meal , I do n't go back to the restaurant , or I only order carryout from them . If a bagger at the grocery store just throws my groceries haphazardly into the bags , I 'll look for a different line every time . I want to know that the person I 'm dealing with cares about me , and my business . I also want to know that I have some flexibility - if they 're the only bagger or server , I wo n't go back to those places . An independent agent can offer more options than a name brand office agent would . The name brand can only offer that companies policies , and prices . If their policy is the best one , and I feel the agent truly cares about me and my needs , I 'll buy from them . Chances are though , I 've met with at least one other independent agent -LRB- one not tied to a single brand name - I myself work with several -RRB- to shop prices and coverage before deciding . Again , how they presented themselves to me as they worked for my business was as much a consideration for me as the policy details . If I did n't feel like they cared about anything but the sale , I 'd leave , and thank them for their time . When the time comes that I need help -LRB- and it inevitably does -RRB- I want someone who cares and jumps to help , not someone who has to hunt to figure out who I am . i guess for me , I want a relationship with my business people , -LRB- and my clients -RRB- not just a transaction . I hope that helps you , and I thank you for asking !
This depends upon what you mean by `` Business Car Insurance . '' If you are asking about insuring an automobile with a business auto policy , those are typically more expensive than a personal auto policy . If you are asking about insuring a company car , then that should be handled by the business providing you the automobile . The company should look into endorsements covering other drivers , in case your family members living in the house use your company car . If you are asking how much it costs to insure a company car on your personal auto policy this is not really an option because you do not have a valid insurable interest in the car . What I mean by this is the company owns the car and is getting a benefit from letting you use it , so your only interest is not paying for a car , which is not an insurable interest on your part . I hope this helps !
There is no magic way to determining how much insurance you need . A method you can use for determining how much life insurance coverage you need is to do a simple needs analysis : 1 . Income - How much income do you want to give your family and for how long if you died ? 2 . Education - Do you want to fund your children 's education ? 3 . Debt - Do you want to pay of any debt -LRB- car loan , mortgage , credit cards -RRB- if you died ? Add those three things together and you will have a good idea of how much you would need .
Asking how much renters insurance is with State Farm is like asking how much is a TV at Best Buy ? What size , what model and so on . How much renters insurance premiums are depend on how much personal property coverage , personal liability limits and medical not to mention your past insurance history and location which all play into the rates of renters insurance . This would be true of all insurance companies .
Before the advent of the use of the use of a credit score and multi-variant rating formulas , rate making relied upon what the industry referred to as `` stability factors '' to arrive at rates . Stability factors are things like age , marital status , whether you have a job , have children , and similar types of considerations . The idea was -LRB- and is today -RRB- a person had a better chance of being profitable as a customer -LRB- from the insurer 's point of view -RRB- if you are stable . So , stability factors were things about you and your life that reflect upon your commitment to stability . Owning a house was certainly a stability factor . Today , the rate making logic is decided on a similar assumption about your stability as a customer but we lean harder on credit as an -LRB- all encompassing -RRB- indicator than we do on these other factors . However , most carriers have more than one rate that is possible depending upon answers to the stability factors that are being considered , with credit score and claims history being primary factors . Because the question is an open question subject to more than one interpretation , owning a home does enter into auto insurance from a stability point of view , and a rate point of view . Carriers understand that customers with auto or home , but not both , have more claims and cost more on claims . Those with auto and home together with one carrier will be -LRB- on average -RRB- 15-20 % less costly to insured from the claims point of view . That is why carriers offer auto-home multi-line discounts because they know the customer will be a better risk , incur fewer losses , and have losses that cost less , than the customers with only a single line of business with the carrier . So , it is true that owning a home does have an impact on auto insurance . Now , where it is n't likely to have any impact is on the policy coverage itself . Home and auto policies alike are written to provide the coverage intended so having a homeowner policy is n't likely going to impact the coverage on your auto policy . These are the three possible paths your question creates -LRB- in my assessment -RRB- so yes , having home insurance does impact auto insurance from a cost and underwriting perspective , but not from any coverage issue by and large .
The answer to this is very subjective depending upon your situation , but I 'll try to make it a little more simple . The idea has always been that , when you retire , your need for life insurance decreases . Today , that 's not always the case . It 's much more complicated now , but there are some universal ideas : What is your need for pure death benefit ? How much debt do you have and how long will you have it ? How is your pension , 401 -LRB- k -RRB- , etc. set up ? Will the income from this be set up in a way that can provide both you and a spouse with adequate income should either of you die ? If not , how much income do you need to provide in the event of your death ? What will your death cost in terms of funeral expenses , taxes , and estate settlement ? Do you want to have that provided for ? Do you have people or institutions that you want to leave money for ? Will one or both of you need special care ? When you answer these questions and have an amount in mind , it 's time to explore how best to go about setting it up the right way . I 'm not going to go into the type of insurance or any income you may need to offset a shortfall in your retirement . That 's a much larger discussion that I 'll leave for you and an agent you can trust . He/She will be able to talk with you and come up with the program that fits your need and your budget .
The best way to think about it is , to imagine that your unit has been gutted by a fire . You have lost everything that you own . How much money will you want ? If you take pictures of your unit you will know what you had . If you estimated the replacement cost for each item , you would know how much you would want . I suggest that number guide you in selecting a renters policy . If a process server appears at your door with a lawsuit , how much back up do you want ? I suggest you take as much liability coverage as the insurance company offers .
end question
start question
renters-insurance
Will Renters Insurance Cover My Iphone ?
Renters insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses of named perils . Examples of named perils are fire , theft , lightning and vandalism . Your iPhone is considered personal property and would be covered by named perils on the policy . Check your deductible before filing a claim because the standard deductible is $ 500 so it may not make sense to file a claim .
It really depends on your policy and the way it 's written and if something has already happened to your iPhone the only way to make sure is to file a claim with your insurance company . If your iPhone is still undamaged and you just want to make sure it 's protected then contact your insurance agent and tell them `` I want to specifically schedule my iPhone in my homeowner 's policy for $ 600 , replacement cost , special causes of loss '' . That 's insurance talk for `` I want to make sure my iPhone is covered , for anything that might accidentally happens to it , and for the full cost to replace it . Some insurance companies will do this and others will not .
What 's the importance of Renters Insurance ? If you 're renting a house , condo , or an apartment , the last thing you 're thinking about is renters insurance . Since you do n't own the building , the landlord is covered , and you do n't value your personal belongings to really add up , what 's the point ? What would you do if : The building or home catches fire and all your personal contents are destroyed . Now , all your belongings are gone and you do n't have a place to sleep . Your home or apartment is burglarized ; you 've lost your laptop , mobile phone , entertainment system and flat screen TV . How about your more modern technology items such as a Tablet , iPhone , iPod etc. . . A visitor or service provider trips and falls in your home or apartment and decides to sue you for his injuries . Whether or not it is your fault , a renter must replace his or her personal items . If there is a law suit , the renter will have to seek a defense attorney even if there is clearly no fault . How much would it cost to replace your clothes , laptop , and furniture . Here are some reasons to have renters insurance : BURGLARY . You may think your apartment is `` secure '' ! Rental units are prime targets for theft and burglars are getting smarter about how to break into apartments and rental homes ; most of them do not have a security system and are not insured . FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE . The landlord 's insurance wo n't replace your furniture and personal belongings . Renters insurance will cover items damaged by fire , smoke , and other situations . WATER DAMAGE . Renters insurance may cover items caused by water damage . Additional living expenses . If your unit is damaged by water or fire , you 'll likely need to find another place to live whether short or long term . Most policies include coverage for hotel expenses or assistance to find an alternate rental unit if you ca n't live in your rental unit . LIABILITY INSURANCE . Renters insurance can cover injury to another person on your property . It can also include medical payments coverage that pays for expenses of guests . Inexpensive . Renters insurance is very inexpensive if not relatively cheap ! Higher deductibles can decrease the cost of insurance . Renters insurance is a must if not required by your landlord and can save you thousands of dollars , all for a lot less than you might think . Get a free quote and get covered today online by visiting WEBSITELINK
Renters insurance covers personal property any where in the world and your iPhone is considered personal property . Most policies provide coverage up to 10 % if your item is stolen or damaged by a covered loss if the item is away from your principal residence . For example , if your policy covers up to $ 30,000 you would have up to $ 3,000 coverage for personal property away from your apartment . Before you file the claim , check your deductible because if your deductible is $ 500 and the iPhone is worth $ 600 it probably is n't worth filling a claim .
Because an Iphone is personal property , it will be covered by most homeowners policies . Unless it is specifically scheduled on a personal articles floater that is attached as a part of the homeowners policy it will be treated as all other personal property . By that I mean that the loss will be adjusted subject to the deductible . The claim must show that damage has occurred and that the damage was caused by one of the perils covered by the policy . The personal property is also subject to a reduced limit of coverage when it is away from the covered home . Few Iphones will be more valuable that the reduced limit and so should be covered . There are independent companies that provide specialized coverage for mobile phones and most service providers have arrangements to secure coverage .
Most renters policies will cover a lost or stolen Iphone . However , after factoring in the deductible for your renters insurance and how an additional claim may affect your insurance rates , it may not be worthwhile to make that claim . Speak with your agent or broker to find out how this claim will affect you .
iphone should be covered under theft minus your deductible . Breakage or loss would not be covered . Most homeowner deductibles run from 1000 and higher so just having your iphone stolen would not even meet the deductible unless the phone was included as part of a much larger theft that may have occurred .
All of your personal property is covered under a renters policy . The policy covers damage that is caused by one of the perils identified in the policy . The IPhone is probably covered away from the residence as ten percent of the coverage limit is available for your personal property away from the residence . Recovery is reduced by the deductible .
Renters insurance is designed to cover sudden and accidental losses of named perils . Examples of named perils are fire , theft , lightning and vandalism . Your iPhone is considered personal property and would be covered by named perils on the policy . Check your deductible before filing a claim because the standard deductible is $ 500 so it may not make sense to file a claim .
Expensive is a relative term to the person using it . Based on my limited experience within my geographic location ; renters insurance is typically very inexpensive . I would say based on my experience that an average renters insurance policy in my area is around ten dollars per month and if you have your renters and auto coverage with the same carrier you will typically receive additional discounts . If you feel the rate for your renters insurance is too high call some other local agents in your area to receive quotes from other carriers for the coverage you seek .
Yes , most renters insurance policies do protect against theft of property . However , excessively , or unusually valuable items such as valuable jewelry , expensive instruments , expensive clothing , or valuable antiques should be picked up on an add-on special rider , designed to cover the increased value not covered by the generic renters insurance policy itself . For example , my renters policy does cover my classic guitar , but that guitar is worth a good bit more than what the generic renters policy normally allows for , so I have an add-on rider tailored just to cover that item . These add-ons allow you to tailor the policy to your specific needs , and they are relatively inexpensive . Plus they remove an reasonable doubt about the item covered .
If you are referring to a room mate situation , then it would be wise for each person to have renter 's insurance . If a husband & wife , then it is not needed on each person . Insurance is based on an insurable interest . For example if I had a room mate , my room mate has no insurable interest in my stuff or my liability . There is one other option , the renter 's policy could be endorsed to insure the room mate as an additional insured . The room mate 's contents would not be covered , but at least the room mate would have liability coverage . -LRB- see some of my other answers regarding renter 's insurance -RRB- .
Renters insurance will carry liability protection for the renter who purchased the policy . Now lets say for example the renter owns a dog and the dog bites his friend . The owner of the dog , in this case the renter will be liable for the dog bite and his renters policy will respond . Now lets say the renter did not have a policy . Although the renter is potentially liable the person who was bit could go after the landlord for recovery since he or she is the owner of the property . The renter having a policy that responds could very well keep the landlord out of the entire claim process . In my opinion all landlords should require their tenants to carry a renters policy .
It is both for you and their safety net . Said you have a friend stop by your apartment , slip and fall on your door steps . If you have renter 's insurance ; which have a liability section , your renters will be able to cover it if they decide to sue . Now bear in mind they will probably sue both you and your landlord , but having that you with renter 's means their insurance comes last if even needed . This is also why the landlord will always ask to have them added on to your policy as additional insured . So your renter 's policy covers them too for your liabilities . The other side of the coin is your personal property is covered under renters . So said your apartment has a fire or burglarize , your renter 's insurance will paid for the losses . A renter 's policy is very cheap compared to the coverage it offers . In my state , a basic policy runs $ 80 to $ 110 a year . It is less if you were to package it with your autos .
I do not see very many disadvantages to renters insurance . Lets look at the coverage renters insurance provides , and then we can talk about what it does not cover . Renters insurance is designed to cover your personal property , protect you if you are sued , and pay medical bills if someone is injured on your property . Most people get upset when their insurance does not cover something . Sometimes people file claims to pay their landlord for clean up their deposit did not cover -LRB- this is not covered -RRB- . Some agents use renters insurance as an ad on coverage and they choose how much coverage without consulting your need . If you have renters insurance and only have $ 10k of coverage when you needed more you will not be paid more than the $ 10k A common deductible on renters insurance policies is $ 500 , and often smaller theft claims do not exceed the deductible . I see this a lot in personal items stolen out of vehicles . I think the advantages of having renters insurance far out way not having it . People in our society sue for a lot of different things , and protecting your self from being sued for Bodily Injury or Property Damage out side of your Auto is an essential part of creating a sound financial plan . Just make sure you have the proper coverage before you buy .
When you rent an apartment , you have the option to buy renters insurance . These policies protect your belongings while you live in the rental property . It is up to your whether you want to buy one of these policies . This insurance isnt needed to rent an apartment . There is no government law that forces you to buy renters insurance before you can rent an apartment . Its not like driving a car , which requires car insurance . If you want to rent an apartment without insurance , you are free to do so . It also doesnt matter to your landlord whether or not you have renters insurance . A renters policy doesnt cover damage to your apartment building or to your landlords property . Your landlord will protect himself with his own insurance policy . Since you dont cover your landlord at all with renters insurance , he wont ask you to buy it before renting out the apartment . While renters insurance is not a requirement , it is often a good idea . If your apartment is robbed or destroyed in an accident , you will need to replace all your belongings on your own . In addition , if someone gets hurt in your home , you as the renter are liable . The injured person could sue you and force a costly settlement . Renters insurance covers you in both these costly situations . When you own one of these policies , you protect yourself from the financial risks of owning an apartment .
If your lease agreement has a clause requiring Renters Insurance , yes , the Landlord may enforce the clause thereby forcing you to buy Renters Insurance or being in breach of the contract . Renters Insurance is a valuable coverage ; many renters simply deny the issue due to the small cost of coverage . In our many years in business , we have seen a variety of claims ; the following is just a short synopsis of the necessary protection . Renters Insurance includes Personal Property Coverage and Personal Liability Insurance . Liability Insurance being the more important coverage as this is where a legal action against the renter could cause undue hardship . If a fire or water damage claim is caused by the renter , the renter would be negligent and therefore liable for the damage caused . Although the property may be insured , the insurance carrier of the Landlord would subrogate and may bring legal action against the tenant . Personal Property coverage would provide protection against theft , fire and water damage to the contents of the renter . The Landlord 's insurance does not cover the tenant 's property in any way ; neither does it allow for legal protection of the tenant . Should a tenant not be interested in this valuable protection , we recommend purchasing the minimum available personal property coverage with the minimum liability protection of $ 100,000 . This coverage would cost in the range of $ 100 - $ 300 per year depending on the region of the country and the specific insurance carrier underwriting the risk . You may obtain a Renters Insurance quote online at : WEBSITELINK
The premium for renters insurance could vary greatly for each individual . In my experience and within my geographic area renters insurance can start at as little as seven dollars per month and up . In some cases when you have your auto and your renters insurance with the same carrier the cost of the renters insurance could virtually free . Contact a local agent to find out about pricing in your area for your needs .
When you rent your home , it might seem like you dont need insurance . If the building gets damaged in an accident , it will be your landlords problem , not yours . However , just because you are renting your home doesnt mean you dont have anything at stake . There are a few important reasons why you should consider getting renters insurance . The first reason to get renters insurance is to protect your belongings . Your landlords insurance only covers his property . It will cover repairing the building and anything he owns in your home , but wont cover anything you own . If your property is destroyed by a fire or someone breaks in and steals your valuables , youll be on you own to replace everything . This can easily cost you thousands of dollars out of pocket . When you have renters insurance , it will cover these losses . Another reason to buy renters insurance is to protect yourself against lawsuits . If someone has an accident and get badly injured in your home , you as the renter could be liable . Renters insurance protects you against this liability and makes sure you dont lose a fortune in a lawsuit . Lastly , renters insurance is very inexpensive . Many policies cost less than a dollar a day . This means you can get this important protection without having to make a big financial commitment . WEBSITELINK
I previously posted this piece in response to a renter insurance question . I am sharing it here , hoping that it might be of value in answer to this inquiry . Mr. Pipes provides a good summary before me and concludes with an important question . I am adding this message with a personal example of the value of this coverage . Renters insurance policies provide a considerable amount of coverage for a relatively small premium . For starters , it is extremely valuable coverage in the event of a loss to your personal property from perils such as fire , smoke , theft and several other common loss circumstances . It also provides some coverage for liability which can be of significant value . Other desired coverages can be economically added . From a personal standpoint , I saw the value first-hand when my Sons had a severe kitchen fire in their apartment in Raleigh , NC a few years ago . Fortunately , no one was hurt but the apartment became totally uninhabitable as a result of the fire and smoke damage . Because my Sons were astute enough to have purchased a renters policy -LRB- they finally listened to their Father ! ... -RRB- they were reimbursed for all of their burned and smoke-damaged possessions . Additionally , they received full reimbursement for living expenses elsewhere while restoration was being completed . When the landlord sued them for negligence related to the cause of the fire ... which was quickly thrown-out in court ... the insurance carrier provided them a defense for the negligence allegation , including the presence of a defense lawyer during the formal hearing . All-in-all , it cost my Sons their very affordable premium and a small loss deductible to get back to their lives . Without the renters policy , they would have been ` hurting ' for a long time !
end question
start question
medicare-insurance
What The Difference Between Medigap And Medicare Advantage ?
Medigap and Medicare Advantage are as different as apples and oranges . Medigap , also known as Medicare supplement , is designed to work in conjunction with original Medicare . Your original Medicare plan has no networks but does have deductibles and coinsurance that can leave you owing several thousand dollars . Medicare Advantage -LRB- formerly known as Medicare Part C -RRB- is a privately managed Medicare benefit offered by insurance carriers . With Medicare Advantage plans you have network providers , lower premiums than Medigap , and significantly higher out of pocket .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are supplemental insurance plans that cover all or a portion of the gaps in Original Medicare -LRB- depending on which Medigap plan you buy -RRB- . They are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
In a way , yes . What 's actually occurring is you 're leaving Medicare Advantage to go back to Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and adding a Medigap plan to that to cover the 20 % of expenses that Original Medicare does not . During the annual enrollment period -LRB- AEP - October 15-December 7 -RRB- , you would apply for a Medigap plan noting to the carrier your intent to disenroll from the Medicare Advantage plan -LRB- you ca n't have both unfortunately -RRB- . The effective date for the coverage would be set up as January 1 of the following year because your Medicare Advantage plan is set up as a one-year contract providing coverage from January 1-December 31 for the year you enrolled for . If it 's your first year in a Medicare Advantage plan and you want to go back to Original Medicare , you will have a guaranteed-issue right -LRB- via a `` trial right '' when it 's your first time in an MA plan -RRB- to secure any Medigap plan and can not be declined for any medical reasons . Another `` guaranteed-issue '' / `` trial right '' situation is if you dropped a Medigap plan to go to Medicare Advantage -LRB- for the first time and you 've been in the plan for less than one year -RRB- and want to go back to Medigap , you can secure the Medigap policy you had before you joined the Medicare Advantage Plan , if the same insurance company you had before still offers it . If your prior carrier your former Medigap policy was through no longer offers that same plan , you can buy either a plan A , B , C , F , K , or L from any insurance company offering coverage in your area . For either `` trial right '' scenarios , it can be done at any point during the year -LRB- not just during AEP -RRB- as early as 60 days before the date your Medicare Advantage coverage will terminate and no later than 63 days after it ends . It 's best to speak with an independent broker who can shop the case for you among many carriers to make sure you 're getting the desired Medigap plan at the lowest possible cost since they 're standardized -LRB- the coverage is the same for a given Medigap plan regardless of who it 's through - the only difference being price -RRB- . Captive agents can only offer plans from the carrier work they work for . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your Medicare insurance coverage , including plan quotes and comparisons for Medigap plans , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay . Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Medigap plans -LRB- commonly referred to as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 - the trade-off being a substantially reduced premium -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefitsare used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits available under a Medigap plan are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Each plan covers a different combination of these 9 benefits -LRB- some of the plans feature coinsurance or copayments for certain benefits -RRB- . If cost is not a major factor for you , Plan F will be the recommended choice because it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % - it 's the most popular plan by far . If you 're looking to keep your costs down , but still have very comprehensive coverage , you may want to look at plans C , G , and N as well . When you 're looking to buy a Medigap plan , you should consult with an independent Medigap insurance agent to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs , help you identify all of the carriers offering Medigap plans in your zip code , and which one will be able to offer the coverage to you at the lowest cost -LRB- the plans are standardized so the biggest difference between them is price - the benefits are exactly the same regardless of the carrier you have the Medigap plan through -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage needs , including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes . Generally , if you 're on Medicare Advantage , you can only apply for a Medigap plan during the annual enrollment period -LRB- October 15-December 7 -RRB- because this is the time when you 're able to leave your Medicare Advantage plan . You would be subject to the medical underwriting process -LRB- answering the health questions on a Medigap plan application -RRB- . To buy a Medigap plan without medical underwriting , you would need to qualify for a guaranteed-issue right . In the case of when you have Medicare Advantage , you would have to meet one of the following conditions : 1 -RRB- You have a Medicare Advantage plan and your plan is leaving Medicare , stops servicing your area , or you move out of the plan 's service area . Please note , you have to go back to original Medicare -LRB- Part A & B -RRB- coverage to qualify for this guaranteed-issue right . 2 -RRB- You joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you were first eligible for Medicare Part A at age 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide you want to switch to original Medicare -LRB- known as a `` trial right '' -RRB- . 3 -RRB- You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage plan for the first time , have been in the plan less than a year , and you want to switch back -LRB- this is another type of `` trial right '' -RRB- . 4 -RRB- You leave a Medicare Advantage plan because the company has n't followed the rules , or it misled you . These 4 items are from Medicare 's website and can be found in your Medicare & You guidebook - copies are available on the Medicare.gov website -LRB- I can also e-mail you one if needed -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your Medigap coverage including quotes and plan comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes and no . You can not be turned down for Medigap Insurance if : You are in your Open Enrollment Period -- the one-time only , 6 month period that allows you to buy any Medigap policy you want that is sold in your state -LRB- starting the first month you 're covered under Medicare Part B AND you 're 65 or older -RRB- . During this period , an insurance company can not deny you a Medigap policy . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area , or you move out of your Medicare Advantage Plan area . You have orignial Medicare and an employer , retiree , union , or COBRA coverage that is ending . You move out of the service area for your Medicare SELECT policy . When you were first eligible for Part A at 65 , you joined a Medicare Advantage Plan or PACE program and you decide within the first year of joining to switch back to Original Medicare . You dropped a Medigap policy to join a Medicare Advantage Plan for the first time , it 's been les than a year and you want to switch back . The Medigap insurance company that holds your policy goes bankrupt , or your coverage otherwise ends through no fault of your own . However ... If you already have a Medigap policy and want to switch to another company , you will be required to answer health questions on the application . All insurance companies are unique with their medical underwriting guidelines ; but , you must be approved in order to buy a Medigap policy . If you have original Medicare Part A and B and are outside the Open Enrollment Period , then you will also be required to answer health questions to be approved through the medical underwriting process . Every individual case is unique and an agent who specializes in Medicare Supplement insurance , can help you determine your ability to get Medigap insurance . If I can be of assistance , please call me at 1-888-411-1329 .
Let me start by saying that Medigap isnt the same as Part B but lets get a better understanding of how Medicare works . If you look at page 17 of the 2015 Medicare and You book you will see there are 2 main choices on how you can get your Medicare coverage . There is Original Medicare that includes Part A and B with the option to fill in the gaps in Original Medicare by buying a Medicare Supplement Insurance -LRB- Medigap -RRB- policy . Or there is Medicare Advantage Plan , Part C , which include Part A , Part B and in most cases Part D. On page 92 of the Medicare and You book you will find that all Medigap policies are standardized . All polices offer that same basic benefits but different insurance companies may charge you different premiums for the same exact policy . Its a good idea to use a good broker that represents multi companies that can show you not only the price difference but also the average rate increases because all Medigap policies go up every year . Now there are different Medigap plans A-N , the easiest way to think about this is like car insurance . You can buy a car insurance policy with no deductible but by doing so your premium will be higher . If you choose to assume some of the risk , buying a policy with a deductible your premium will be lower . As long as youre in fairly good health -LRB- no major illnesses or recent hospitalization with in the last 2 years -RRB- you can show the market for the lowest price , remember Medigap plans always have a price increase each year and its always a wise decision to shop around every couple of years to find the best price . I am aware of one insurance company that once you are approved , will allow you to change between plans without re-looking at your current health , which may be a viable option if you want to save money with a higher deductible while you are in good health and then when your health starts to change you change your plan to a lower deductible . If you have any other question feel free to contact me for a phone review or we can chat on Skype .
Medigap works along side your original Medicare helping to pay Medicare covered expenses that are not paid for by Medicare due to deductibles and coinsurance . You will pay a premium for a Medigap plan but your out of pocket exposure in the event of a large claim will be less than with a Medicare Advantage plan Medicare Advantage takes the place of Medicare . While you are still in the Medicare system and protections , responsibility for benefits and claim management are provided by the insurance company , not Medicare . You can not have both a Medigap and a Medicare Advantage Plan since Medicare Advantage has different deductibles and copay 's than Medicare . Premiums are much less than Medigap plans but you will have more out of pocket exposure in most cases .
Medigap and Med Advantage plans are SIGNIFICANTLY different . For a MedAdvantage Plan , they are basically like an HMO . You have a primary physician who is essentially the gate keeper . You do need referrals and you do have co-pays . A Med Advantage plan does also contain a drug plan component , which the supplements do not . If you have significant health issues , than of course the co-pays can add up , however the monthly premium is usually significantly less than the average Medigap plan . Medigap Plans again , are significantly different . The coverage provided by a Medigap Plan is dependent upon what plan you get . The plans are all identified by a corresponding letter . For example , an F Plan tends to offer the most solid coverage , but of course the price is among the highest as you 'd expect . Each lettered plan is written and designed by the government , so no F Plan is different than another , no G is different than another G , etc etc. . What is different is what each individual insurance company charges for the play . So it 's not uncommon for company A to charge 1 price for an F Plan , and companies B , C , D , & E all have significantly different prices for the exact SAME COVERAGE . One thing that I would do is make sure you understand how each lettered plan works , because the difference in coverage can be quite significant . For example , make sure you understand exactly what a `` Part B Excess Charge '' is . In some states , such as PA , they are illegal , but in my state , which is NJ they are perfectly legal . If you purchase a plan that does n't cover the Part B Excess Charge , you could find yourself pleasantly surprised by a significant bill if you ever have a major procedure done . Medigap Plans DO NOT come with a drug plan , or vision plan or dental . A Drug Plan is the only one you are REQUIRED to get , or you could face a penalty by the government . But again , the drug plan must be purchased on the side , as there is no such thing as a Medigap that comes with a drug plan .
You are eligible for Medigap coverage if you have both Medicare Part A & Medicare Part B active . When you first enroll in Part B , you trigger a 6-month initial open enrollment period to buy a Medigap plan -LRB- also known as Medicare Supplement plans -RRB- with NO MEDICAL UNDERWRITING . This is the BEST time to buy a supplement plan because regardless of your medical history , you can buy any Medigap plan from any carrier and can not be declined . Plans F and G offer the most comprehensive coverage and therefore the most predictable expense structure - a major benefit for individuals on a fixed income . Please note , Medigap plans are standardized so the difference between carriers is price - plan F is the exact same plan F from every insurance company . Beyond this window , you 'll be subject to answering health questions to qualify for a new plan -LRB- every carriers ' questions are different -RRB- if you do n't have a guaranteed-issue right available to you . If you 're under 65 , you can still purchase a Medigap plan if you 're on Medicare for disability or ESRD , but the cost will be very high . Medigap plans are designed to be purchased by individuals age 65 and up . Under age 65 individuals on Medicare will likely either buy a Medicare Advantage plan or stay under original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- and add a stand-alone Part D plan for their prescription drug coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for help with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
I do n't think is a matter of `` need '' for a medicare advantage plan , but a matter of choice . Would a Medicare Advantage plan be a better choice compared to a supplement or going with just basic medicare ? It is wise to compare these options and how they will effect you . As Ted has noted , there are some advantages to Medicare Advantage plans that make them very attractive as a choice to a consumer . So , it might be better to consider a simple basic difference between Medicare supplements and Medicare Advantage , Medicare `` rights '' . When you purchase a Medicare Advantage you are assigning your Medicare rights to that organization and commit to service -LRB- outside of emergency -RRB- to that organization as they become your Medicare provider . A Medicare Supplement does not restrict the insured to any one location or provider . For some people , this is a very important issue and could be the deciding factor .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable ! The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- .
Each type has it 's pros and cons . Medigap plans -LRB- commonly known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- work with Original Medicare -LRB- Parts A & B -RRB- to fill the `` gaps '' that it does n't cover . Original Medicare covers about 80 % of your healthcare expenses . A Medigap plan can cover a portion or all of the other 20 % , depending on which one you get . That 's a BIG pro . You also are n't restricted to networks , you do n't need referrals to see specialists , any doctor that accepts Medicare will accept the Medigap plan , you can apply for a different plan at any point throughout the year -LRB- if you want a different carrier or different benefits -RRB- , and they are guaranteed renewable!The only con is that it typically costs more than an Advantage plan . Advantage plans can be a lot cheaper , but have more restrictions and limitations than a Medigap plan does . The big attraction with them is the cost factor as the premiums are very cheap and some plans even feature a $ 0 premium - they can also include drug coverage -LRB- you have to buy a stand-alone part D prescription drug plan if you want prescription coverage when you have a Medigap plan -RRB- . Some of the drawbacks are that you can have network restrictions , the plan coverage can change each year , your doctor can choose to no longer accept that specific plan , you 're locked in to that plan for a year and can only change it during the annual enrollment period -LRB- Oct 15-Dec 7 of each year -RRB- or if you qualify for a special enrollment period . Please note , regardless of which type of coverage , you must have both Part A & Part B and continue paying your Part B premiums -LRB- even though Advantage plans work in place of Original Medicare - Medigap plans work with Original Medicare -RRB- . Please let me know if I can be of further assistance . Thanks very much .
I would definitely recommend it . Medicare has no out of pocket limit . If you come down with a serious illness this can be devastating , leaving you tens of thousands in debt in some cases . If there is a good Medicare Advantage plan in your area then you may want to consider that . Especially if a Medicare Supplement is unaffordable . The advantage would be : Medicare Advantage has out of pocket maximums , usually between $ 3500 and $ 6000 . Many Medicare Advantage Plans have no additional premium other than the Medicare Part B premium you already pay . Many also include Prescription Drugs at no additional premium . Yo have networks but if your area has a strong network then that is generally not going to be an issue . You would also have copay 's , usually between $ 10 and $ 20 for a primary care doctor . This makes your health care much easier to predict since under original Medicare you pay 20 % of whatever Medicare approves but you have no idea what that will be until you get your bill . There are also many affordable Medicare Supplements . I usually recommend the supplements if you can afford the premium . Find a good local agent who specializes in Medicare plans , both supplements and Advantage plans . A good agent will help you decide which will be in your best interests with no pressure
Medicare Advantage is a private form of Medicare run by insurance companies . When you enroll in a Medicare Advantage plan you are no longer participating in original Medicare . Your doctor and other providers file claims with your Advantage insurance carrier , not with Medicare . Your Advantage carrier adjudicates the claim and pays it if approved . Advantage plans are not a supplement to Medicare , they replace Medicare . Amplification . Some people are confused about this since Advantage plans are often referred to as Medicare Part C . When you enroll in an Advantage plan your benefits are provided by an insurance carrier that is a sub-contractor of Medicare . Other than your Medicare Part B premium -LRB- which is still paid to Medicare , or deducted from your Social Security check -RRB- premiums -LRB- if any -RRB- for your benefits are paid to the Advantage carrier . Medicare does not review or adjudicate claims . Medicare does not resolve claim disputes you may have with your Advantage carrier . All of your benefits are covered and provided by your Advantage policy . If you decide to drop your Advantage coverage you have a right to switch to original Medicare . Original Medicare and Medicare Advantage are two separate and distinct systems of providing health insurance . Advantage plans cover the same medical conditions as Medicare -LRB- except Advantage carriers will not issue a policy if you have ESRD -RRB- but the benefits and administration are completely separate . Consider this . Medicare Part D is an insured benefit you purchase from an insurance carrier . The drug plans are not offered direct by Medicare and your claims are handled by the insurance carrier or the PBM that manages the coverage for them . Medicare Part C and D are completely independent from Medicare .
If you have a Medicare Advantage Plan you can switch to a Medigap Plan during AEP -LRB- Annual Election Period -RRB- . Unless you are in a Guaranteed Issue situation , you will have to medically qualify for a Medigap Plan . There are other times during the year that you can switch from a Medicare Advantage Plan to Medigap . If you have Guaranteed Issue Rights , you can purchase a Medigap Plan in your state during your Guaranteed Issue period . Some Guaranteed Issue situations include : 1 . Your Medicare Advantage Plan is leaving Medicare or stops giving care in your area . 2 . You move out of your Plan 's service area . 3 . You joined a MA / MAPD when your were first eligible for Medicare Part A at 65 and within the first year of joining , you decide to switch back to Original Medicare . 4 . You dropped a Medigap Policy to join a MA / MAPD for the first time . You 've been in the Plan less than a year and you want to switch back . 5 . You leave a MA / MAPD because the company has n't ' followed the rules -- or misled you . MA = -LRB- Medicare Advantage -RRB- MAPD = -LRB- Medicare Advantage Prescription Drug -RRB- Thank you for reading my response .
Medigap plans -LRB- also known as Medicare supplement plans -RRB- are designed to help seniors who want high quality healthcare and are on Medicare , cover the gap between what hospitals and doctors charge for their services and what Medicare will pay.Health insurance is constantly changing , which can make finding the right plan for you very strenuous . Supplementing your Original Medicare coverage -LRB- Medicare Parts A & B -RRB- with a Medicare Supplement plan will help you create a very predictable expense structure for your healthcare and allow you to see any doctor you want that accepts Medicare . Any doctor that accepts Medicare will also accept your Medicare Supplement plan . There are 10 different Medicare supplement plans and they are all standardized , meaning a plan F from company A and a plan F from company B feature the EXACT the same benefits . The 10 different plans available are plans A , B , C , D , F , G , K , L , M , and N -LRB- a high-deductible plan F is also available that features a $ 2,140 deductible in 2014 -RRB- . Each plan offers certain benefits some more comprehensive than others . Each plan must cover a core set of benefits -LRB- also known as the basic benefits -RRB- . The basic benefits are : 1 -RRB- Medicare Part A coinsurance plus coverage for 365 additional days after Medicare benefits are used up . 2 -RRB- Medicare Part B coinsurance or copayment 3 -RRB- First 3 pints of blood 4 -RRB- Part A hospice care coinsurance or copayment There 's a total of 9 benefits that can be secured . The other 5 benefits are : 1 -RRB- Skilled Nursing Facility Care coinsurance 2 -RRB- Medicare Part A deductible 3 -RRB- Medicare Part B deductible 4 -RRB- Medicare Part B excess charges 5 -RRB- Foreign travel emergency -LRB- up to plan limits -RRB- Each plan features a different structure , Plan F is the most popular plan because it 's the most comprehensive Medigap plan available as it covers all 9 benefits at 100 % . Consult with an experienced broker to review the plans in detail to see which one will best serve your needs . We have an in-depth knowledge of Medigap plans and can provide quotes from multiple carriers . I hope the information is helpful . I have a strong background in senior insurance -LRB- including Medigap plans -RRB- so please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
Yes , you can change from Medicare Advantage to Medigap . You must first disenroll from your Medicare Advantage Plan and switch back to original Medicare . If you joined a Medicare Advantage plan when you first signed up for Medicare and are changing to Medigap within 12 months , you can choose from any Medigap policy . If you had a Medigap policy , switched to Medicare Advantage , and decided within 12 months to go back to Medigap , you can get your old policy back if it is still available . However , it will no longer have the prescription drug coverage . You may be able to get that from Medicare Part D.
end question
start question
health-insurance
Does Aetna Student Health Insurance Cover Dental ?
Most student health plans provide limited benefits and are overpriced . For about the same premium you can usually get a true major medical plan . Student health plans usually include benefits centered around the student health center and possibly an affiliation with a local hospital . Pre-existing conditions may not be covered at all or there will be a delay of up to 12 months before they are considered a covered expense . Also the health policies have an expiration date , usually coinciding with the school year . Dental benefits , if included , are most likely limited to treating injury to your teeth .
It depends on the policy , but you can add it on to most policies . Some of the policies will have it included since most health plans are a `` plan '' that has set features including deductibles , copays , etc so look at all of the features and determine which fits what you need .
Generally AETNA health insurance plans cover acupuncture but only under specific circumstances -LRB- generally in lieu of using general anesthesia for a specific medical or dental procedure covered under the health insurance policy -RRB- and for relatively short list of medical situations such as lower back pain , migraines and a few other conditions . The list of conditions for which AETNA -LRB- or virtually any major medical insurance provider -RRB- will not cover acupuncture is far longer than the list of conditions that qualify . Before using acupuncture you should have your medical provider check with AETNA 's preauthorization department to determine if your specific condition will qualify for coverage and , if so , from what specific providers .
Most student health plans provide limited benefits and are overpriced . For about the same premium you can usually get a true major medical plan . Student health plans usually include benefits centered around the student health center and possibly an affiliation with a local hospital . Pre-existing conditions may not be covered at all or there will be a delay of up to 12 months before they are considered a covered expense . Also the health policies have an expiration date , usually coinciding with the school year . Dental benefits , if included , are most likely limited to treating injury to your teeth .
Blue Cross/Blue Shield health insurance is a brand name dating back to the depression era for what were once state based health insurance plans with a charter to provide affordable health insurance for the citizens of the state they were chartered in . In many ways they were treated as non-profit organizations which often gave them a competitive advantage versus for profit health insurance companies . Over the decades there has been consolidation among many state BC/BS plans and telling the difference between today 's Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans and their other health insurance competitors is largely a distinction without a difference in today 's marketplace . Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans generally provide a range of individual and group insurance products and administrative services that range from health insurance to dental , vision , life and disability insurance . At a minimum they cover all medical services required by their state health insurance regulations and the requirements of the Federal Affordable Care Act . In this regard what they cover is no different than what you will find covered by insurance carriers such as CIGNA , Aetna , Humana or United Healthcare to give you some commonly known competitors . You will observe differences in various health plan design options and perhaps in how their rates are quoted between all health insurance carriers , whether it is Blue Cross/Blue Shield or any other insurance carriers but the basic services they are covering are all essentially the same .
Geico provides many lines of insurance such as auto , home , motorcycle , condo , life , RV , boat , renters and more ! However , they do not underwrite or provide health insurance products . However , there are many large carriers that offer healthcare plans such as Blue Cross , Aetna , Humana , Cigna and UnitedHealthone . And it 's very easy to view free online quotes for these carriers . Visiting an established reputable website or speaking -LRB- or emailing -RRB- with an experienced broker will allow you to easily compare the best options . Comprehensive , catastrophic , student and HSA policies will be available . You may also qualify for a federal tax subsidy for your State Health Exchange plans .
Assurant Heath is a health insurance company not a unique type of health insurance . They offer a wide range of both individual major medical insurance plans as well as group health insurance plans . They also offer dental insurance and supplementary insurance products . In this way Assurant Health is a competitor with Blue Cross/Blue Shield plans , Humana , AETNA , CIGNA , United Healthcare and other health insurance companies across the nation .
I ca n't tell from your questionif your coverage is on an individual policy with AETNA or a group policy , that might have some bearing on the answer . If you are on a group policy it is possible that you could continue your current plan for sometime under the provisions of the COBRA law . If you are covered under an individual AETNA policy then there will almost certainly be issues . You will need to check with AETNA 's customer service unit to be sure about what the portability provisions are on your policy , but my take on the individual situation is that health insurance , especially individual health insurance , is regulated at the state level . AETNA is available in the individual marketplaces of both New York and Arizona . But , an AETNA policy approved in New York may not be the same as an AETNA policy approved for sale in Arizona . The ratesand network will also almost certainly change . So , taking your New York policy with you may not be simple or even possible . New York has a reputation for doing things their own way and this is especially true in the insurance business . You can certainly stay with AETNA when you move to Arizona but I would anticipate that they will want to enroll you in an AETNA individual policy approved for residents of Arizona that will then also be an ObamaCare compliant plan . With relocation out of state being involved , I think it is unlikely you will be able to continue your grandfathered plan -LRB- I hope I 'm wrong for your sake -RRB- . A move like yours is explicitly listed in the Affordable Care Act as one of the `` change of life status '' events that qualifies you to enroll in ObamaCare outside of open enrollment . You 'll have 60-days to enroll from the date your existing coverage might cease .
On a side note to Mr. Vineyard 's answer which is great , once you receive the Medicare claim number which is usually your social security number with a letter behind it , this will allow you to sign up for a Medicare Advantage Plan . These plans are offered through private insurance company 's like Aetna , United HealthCare , and Humana and have to be at a minimum as good as original Medicare but these advantage plans almost always have added benefits such as dental , vision , and hearing that original Medicare does not have . Most company 's have several plans available at a $ 0.00 monthly premium in addition to your Part B premium . Original Medicare only covers 80 % and you pay 20 % . There are no co-pays .
Original Medicare pays 80 % for an MRI and you pay 20 % . Often times a Medicare Advantage plan from a private insurance company such as Aetna , application here WEBSITELINK , has small copay 's from $ 0 to $ 250 for a MRI . Medicare ADvantage plans must be at least as good as Original Medicare but most plans offer benefits such as dental , vision , and hearing at no additional charge .
Aetna is a stock life insurance carrier and as such has policyholders , not members . Aetna is a major insurance carrier involved in many areas of insurance and risk management . Aetna provides individual and group health insurance coverage . They also offer life insurance and Medicare plans . As such , Aetna has many hundred thousands of policyholders around the world .
Medicare does not cover `` dental '' . While `` Medicare Advantage '' covers some `` preventive care procedures it does not cover extensive dental procedures . There are `` dental '' policies available the coverage is usually limited to $ 1000 per year . In most cases dental maintenance is best planned to have preventive cleaning done each year plus any required `` dental filling ' each year but then if you need more extreme procedures you will probably spend a chunk of your vacation funds in the dental office
Health Insurance and Dental insurance are definately not the same . Dental insurance most certainly is an optional product that can be purchased stand alone alongside any other medical product . Dental insurance always has a specified `` waiting period '' before services can be performed and dental insurance either pays on a percentage of the total bill or it pays a flat dollar amount per service billed . All dental policies have a calendar year maximum that is payable . Some have deductibles , some do not . Health Insurance on the other hand always has a deductible and out of pocket , does not have a waiting period , and does not have an annual cap on benefits . Dental benefits or out of pockets do not have anything to do with health insurance out of pockets .
You would be best served to assume the answer to this question will be `` No '' , especially if you are over age 18 . Vision exams , eyeglasses and contact lenses are generally covered under a separate vision insurance plan if your employer offers one or you choose to purchase coverage in the individual market . There are certainly some self-funded employer health plans and union health plans that include vision coverage in the major medical package but these are relatively rare . An area of confusion and frustration for many businesses and individuals who are purchasing health insurance plans that meet the minimum essential benefits requirements of the Affordable Care Act -LRB- ObamaCare -RRB- is that it requires that PEDIATRIC dental and vision services be covered under the major medical plan . Of course , some people just hear the dental & vision part and think it applies to adults enrolled in the plan -LRB- it does n't -RRB- . The other big surprise can be how the pediatric dental & vision benefits are structured in the health plan . Preventive dental and an annual eye exam should be covered at 100 % . After that , the coverage can vary wildly from one insurance carrier to the next . Some design their pediatric dental & vision benefits like standard vision and dental insurance plans that people have been accustomed to . However , it is not uncommon to find that non-preventive pediatric dental and vision services are subject to the major medical plan 's deductible and co-insurance provisions . So , technically your child 's eyeglasses may be covered but if you have a $ 4000 deductible you have n't met then in practical terms this will mean your child 's eyeglasses will be an out-of-pocket expense .
What is the best health insurance for college students ? Going to depend on the situation . First is the student still on the parents plan ? Review your current coverage to see how it would work for out of network coverage , assuming the student is out of the area . If not leaving the plan area , no worries . Kids can remain on parents plans now till age 26 . Most universities REQUIRE a student to have health insurance . They have their own limited plans that they will add onto the cost of your education . The only way to waive this required coverage is to show coverage elsewhere . Student insurance is not awful , but most only provide coverage while enrolled . Summer break you may be on your own . Check your plan booklet .
First , check with your college 's office of student affairs or administration and see if they have a student health insurance plan . Due to the requirements of ObamaCare many of these plans have been cancelled or are being phased out but some do still exist . Next , you can be covered as a dependent on your parent 's health insurance policy until age 26 so if you have recently lost or will be losing coverage when you start school you could possibly be added onto their plan . Regarding true major medical individual health insurance you are pretty well locked out until the next open enrollment period starting on November 15th and the earliest you could be covered would be January 1 , 2015 . This is unless you have what is called a change of life status event -LRB- marriage , divorce , child birth or adoption , losing other coverage -RRB- in which case you have a 60-day time frame to apply for individual health insurance coverage . If you are in good health and coverage for any pre-existing health conditions is not a major concern for you then the best solution for immediate coverage would be to apply for a short term medical insurance policy . These policies are pretty affordable and depending upon the insurance carrier they may issue a policy that runs for a period just short of one year and you can often reapply for coverage . If you reside in Tennessee , Arkansas or Mississippi contact me and I 'll be happy to help you out with this . If you reside in another state seek out a health insurance broker or go online and do a search for Short Term Medical . Assurant Health and United Healthcare/Golden Rule have pretty good short term policies and , of course , you would want to check with the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan in your state . Other than Medicaid that pretty well sums up your options as a student .
Health insurance does not cover dental implants unless there is an accident and severe damage to teeth . Dental insurance may cover implants , however , dental insurance is limited to a fixed dollar amount each year . For example the most common dental insurance pays a maximum of $ 1,500 in benefits a year and only 50 % of major work . If the dental policy covers inplants it may pay 50 % of one or two in a year .
Most student health plans provide limited benefits and are overpriced . For about the same premium you can usually get a true major medical plan . Student health plans usually include benefits centered around the student health center and possibly an affiliation with a local hospital . Pre-existing conditions may not be covered at all or there will be a delay of up to 12 months before they are considered a covered expense . Also the health policies have an expiration date , usually coinciding with the school year .
The most important thing for a college student to understand is that life insurance is issued on the basis of age and health . Normally young people can demand very low premiums for life insurance . The advantage of starting a life insurance policy when young is that there are fewer health concerns . The second thing that a college student should understand is that life insurance is all about statistics . If they have had a class in statistics understanding life insurance should be easy . There is a very large pool of people who would suffer significant loss if they died . They pool their risk so that those who experience this unfortunate event can be compensated by the very small contribution from the vast majority that survive . Inherent in this idea is that the probability of death increases with every passing year . This makes the amount each member of the pool pays into the pool increase each year because more of the participants will die in a given year . The third thing a college student needs to know is that life insurance companies are corporations that are based on the idea of legal reserves . Even though they know that a certain percentage will die of a particular age group they must maintain reserves in the unlikely event that the death rate is higher for some unknown reason such as war . These legal reserve companies are admitted to do business by the various state insurance commissioners . Their reserves are monitored closely to make sure that the companies can keep their promises . The fourth thing a college student needs to know is that even within a specific age there is a wide variation of health . I had classmates who died in their first year of college . One classmate died of a medical condition . This variation is like a bell-shaped curve . Most of the people are in the middle of the curve and are considered to be standard risks , however some are better than average and some are worse than average . Life insurance companies hire underwriters to evaluate the deviations and assign premiums that reflect how different the individual is from the standard risk . The reason that this is done is to maintain the risk pool and make sure it can keep its promises . The fifth thing a college student needs to know is that since life insurance is all about statistics the companies can develop a wide variety of life insurance plans . Some may appear superior while in fact their costs are comparable . There is merely a different design to the plan . For example a student could buy a one year term life policy for $ 500,000 for very little in premium . For a multiple of the premium he could buy a $ 500,000 whole life policy . Neither is good , nor bad . They are just different . The whole life policy will remain in force at the same death benefit for the lifetime of the insured without changing the annual premium . The one year term policy will either cancel or renew at a higher premium at the end of the policy year . If a person knew when they were going to die , they could choose a policy that would maximize benefits . However few of us have that information . The sixth thing a college student should know is that life insurance will probably form the foundation of their financial plan in the future . For this reason it is wise to select a life insurance agent who can service you for the foreseeable future . That doesnt mean to select a peer but rather someone with whom you can mature . The advice of the life insurance agent could be very important as you mature and your needs change . At some point you will probably own a great deal more life insurance . Family , debts and retirement all play a role in determining how much life insurance to carry . The final thing that a college student needs to know is that companies work hard to develop a reputation but the relationship with an agent trumps everything . If you have a good agent , you will find them to be very valuable in the future .
Most students start college with little financial preparation . Sometimes parents who have particular objectives will start saving money for their childrens college education , however , that is not common . The result is that college is now one of the top three lifetime expenses for families that send their children to college . There have been several plans advanced to help families accumulate money to send their children to college . You are probably aware of them . The greatest weakness of these plans is that the money is set aside for an individual student . While there may be an opportunity to name another student there isnt a clean way to recover the money without additional taxes and penalties . A Roth IRA has some income restrictions that might make it unavailable . However , it is a simple plan . Contributions to a Roth IRA are made with after-tax money . There isnt an age limit on who can participate . Even if you already have an employer sponsored you can participate in a Roth IRA . If there is a non-working spouse an IRA can be started on his or her account . As I mentioned before there are some income restrictions based upon gross income level . Once the account has been in force for five years the funds can be withdrawn . These funds can be received free of income tax after age 59 and a half . You can pass the Roth IRA tax free to heirs if you have had the account for more than five years . If you use the account to fund college expenses you can withdraw the funds without paying the 10 % early distribution penalty tax . The money that you withdraw from the Roth IRA is free of income tax as long as it is less than the amount that you contributed . Because of the age restrictions a Roth IRA would be particularly attractive to a grandparent trying to accumulate money for a grandchild . A Roth IRA is best started as early as possible . Most people are in a lower tax bracket in their early years and that amplifies the effectiveness of the Roth IRA . Establishing a systematic deposit plan can be quite effective in accumulating money . If the student receives money from a parent or from their own Roth IRA it must be noted on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid -LRB- FAFSA . -RRB- The receipt of money from a Roth IRA can reduce the students eligibility for other forms of student aid . Incidentally , money coming from grandparents is not monitored . An alternative to a Roth IRA might be permanent life insurance . It has many of the same tax characteristics and has the unique feature of plan completion if the person insured dies . Permanent life insurance is also treated differently by the FAFSA . You could check with a college finance officer about that aspect . The advantage of using either a Roth IRA or permanent life insurance is that it gives your flexibility . If the child decides that they want to run away and join the circus instead of attending your alma mater , you still have the money and in the case of life insurance , the policy might serve other purposes .
end question
start question
life-insurance
How Long Does Universal Life Insurance Last ?
The length of time that a universal life policy is in force is determined by the payment pattern of the owner of the policy . If the policy is continuously underfunded , it will lapse at a relatively early age , sometimes in the early 50s . However , if guidelines and targets are followed a universal life plan can last up to the time of death .
Universal life insurance is a type of permanent insurance program - meaning it can last for the rest of your life . Most universal life policies -LRB- UL -RRB- will pay a death benefit up to age 121 so you can make sure the death benefit will be paid out at some point in the future . UL policies can be dialed down to a specified age -LRB- to age 90 , to age 100 , etc. -RRB- to reduce the premiums - please note , doing so affects the guarantees and assumptions inside the policy . There are several different types of universal life - Guaranteed UL , Current Assumption UL , Indexed UL , and Variable UL . If you 're just buying coverage for the purposes of the death benefit , you would likely want to look at a Guaranteed UL or Current Assumption UL as they will almost always maximize your dollar to death benefit ratio -LRB- meaning you 're getting the most bang for your buck in terms of death benefit -RRB- . With permanent insurance , there has to be money in the cash value to keep the policy going - if the cash value hits $ 0 , then the policy crashes and is no longer paying coverage . Guaranteed ULs are a great way to protect against this because they state that even if the cash value hits $ 0 , the policy will still pay a death benefit as long as you 're still paying your premium . When you 're looking to buy life insurance , you should talk to an independent insurance agent who can work with you on a personal level and help you determine what program structure will be most suitable for your needs and budget and which carrier will work with your medical history best to offer the coverage to you at the lowest possible cost -LRB- independent agents generally work with a multitude of insurance companies and can sell a wide range of carriers ' products -RRB- . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes , policy comparisons , shopping your case , and other tasks , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
The same companies that carry Term Life Insurance often carry Universal Life Insurance , and most agencies that sell Term also sell UL . When purchasing online , you will want to work with a licensed agent who has some experience , so they will understand the in 's and out 's of Universal Life . There are several types of Universal Life Insurance . Guaranteed UL allows you to lock in a level premium that will guarantee the policy to pay the death benefit to a certain age . This guarantee might be 20 years from now ; it might be to age 121 , or something different . It is important to select a guarantee to avoid the problems Universal Life presented in the past , when people bought while interest rates were high , and their policies started lapsing much earlier than anticipated when interest rates dropped . There are also many Universal Life policies that do not have `` no lapse '' guarantees . How long your coverage last relies on what the interest rate and cost of insurance are at any given time . Variable Universal Life allows you to invest in the stock market , with the potential for more growth -LRB- and more loss -RRB- than other UL policies . Indexed Universal Life allows you to take advantage of some modest gains by allocating premium to equity index accounts . While it does not have as much cash growth potential as VUL , it has much more protection from losses . Added to these are Survivor Universal Life policies off all types . These cover two people , and pay when the second person dies . Again , you 'll want to use an experienced agent when you buy UL . There are many knowledgeable agents on this website who can help you .
If your universal life insurance policy is using the cash value of the policy to supplement what you are paying in premium each month , just to keep it in effect , you will need to decide whether to keep or drop your policy . One of the factors to consider in making that decision is how much longer you need life insurance coverage . You can ask for an illustration to see how much longer your policy will stay in effect while staying on that same path . You also must consider how much you are willing to pay to make it last longer . You can also get an illustration asking how much more premium you would need to pay to make it last `` x '' number of years . Generally speaking , if you need the policy for many more years , and if you are able to qualify for a new policy , it may be in your best interest to take the cash value that you have and apply it toward a new Universal Life with a no lapse guarantee . If you do n't need the policy for many more years , it may be best to keep it . Contact a respected agent to help you see your options and make a sound decision about whether or not to drop your universal life policy .
Universal Life insurance is a combination of term life insurance and a tax-deferred savings plan paying a variable return . There is a guaranteed interest rate and cost of insurance set which stipulates how long the policy is guaranteed to last . This can be as long as age 121 with some UL products , so that the policy is then considered permanent insurance . Some Universal Life products , especially Indexed Universal Life or Variable Universal Life , are designed to generate cash value . They may or may not have a guaranteed lifetime no lapse feature . Universal Life is an adjustable and flexible policy that can often be tweaked to meet the needs of the insured over a lifetime .
There are many past universal life policy holders who consider it to be bad because they have been burned by universal life . Most often , this occurred because the projected interest rate for the policy was unrealistically high . This caused their policies to lapse much sooner than expected . Since then , some universal life policies now offer a guaranteed minimum interest rate and maximum COI -LRB- cost of insurance -RRB- . However long your policy is shown to last with those variables is how long your policy is guaranteed to not lapse . In my opinion , universal life insurance is not bad as long as consumers understand the guarantees , or lack thereof .
That is a great question ! Both whole life and universal life insurance policies are cash value building life long policies . Whole life is simple , you pay a set premium every month , and the policy lasts as long as you do , as long as you keep making payments . The death benefit is specifically stated . A universal life policy is not quite so simple . These policies are often marketed with promises of great value growth , and perhaps not so clearly explaining the risks or the things that have to happen to get that great gain . These policies are typically only guaranteed to last 20 years . The payments are given to you in a range , and can vary even from that range . The amounts paid in , the performance of the invested funds , and the cost of the insurance will dictate how long the policy stays in effect , and whether there is growth . I guess a good way to describe it to you is that if you were looking for a policy that you could buy , make payments on and forget about , buy a whole life policy . If you want a policy that could have great gains , that you can watch the performance of , and change the payments of , then buy a UL policy . I hope that helps , thanks for asking !
You life insurance proceeds will last according to the type of policy you got . If a Term policy , the policy will specify a certain number of years , such as 10 or 20 . When the end of the term comes up , the policy will end or jump up in price to an incredibly high price . If death occurs during the term , the policy proceeds will be paid . If death does not occur during the term , no proceeds are paid . If Whole Life that you have not borrowed against and have made payments according to schedule , the policy will pay out when you die or when it matures -LRB- usually at age 100 -RRB- , whatever comes first . If Universal Life , the proceeds will last for as long as the policy was set up to last , and according to how it is performing . UL usually has a guaranteed no lapse period of a set number of years , as long as premiums are made . If the interest rate goes up , it can last longer .
Determining which permanent life insurance is `` the best '' comes down to your specific needs . There are several different types of permanent life insurance available including Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life . Of these three main types , Universal Life has the lowest premiums . Universal Life can last your entire lifetime and would typically be considered the most basic type of permanent life insurance . Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life are two other types of permanent life insurance and each one can have cash value build-up inside the policy . The cash build-up is calculated differently in each of these types . For an Indexed Universal Life policy , you pay a premium that more than covers the cost of insurance and the excess cash builds up inside the policy . That buildup of cash is credited interest based on an index or combination of indices and how they perform over time . Your cash value is never in the market but can grow if the market is up year-over-year . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those needed to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can use to cover future premiums or borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
Whole Life is designed to last your whole life . Your premiums will cover the the cost of insurance protection until the day you die , or else pay you the money in a lump sum if you do not die by a certain age . Whole Life also has a savings component that allows you to borrow from the cash value , if you desire . Universal Life also has the components of insurance protection -LRB- death benefit -RRB- plus savings -LRB- cash value -RRB- . But UL can be designed in a multitude of ways , and it can be further adjusted while the policy is in existence . E.g. . You might want your Universal Life policy to have a large face amount when your children are in the home , but then reduce the face amount to simply pay for final expenses when you are older . You have the flexibility to do that with Universal Life . Not only that , but when you reduce the face amount , you might be able to also reduce or quit paying premiums . Or you can keep paying the same premium and cause your policy to build up extra cash value . A word of caution when buying Universal Life . It is called permanent life insurance , but it is not guaranteed to be permanent unless you choose a UL policy that states that guarantee . Thankfully , there are guaranteed no lapse UL policies on the market ; even those where you can `` dial '' the guarantee to make the policy last to whatever age you choose . As with Whole Life , if you borrow from the policy , you must pay the money back with interest to ensure that your death benefit will be paid per the terms of the contract .
This is what 's known as Universal Life insurance . These are permanent coverage programs that build cash value , much like Whole Life insurance does . The advantage of these programs is that you can pay more or pay less each month to keep the coverage going . However , when you do this , you can affect the guarantees -LRB- and even the non-guaranteed aspects -RRB- under the programs . There are two important factors to keep in mind when structuring a universal life policy , the guaranteed and non-guaranteed side . In short , the guaranteed side tells you how long your coverage is guaranteed for while the non-guaranteed side tells you how long it can continue on for , based on current assumptions -LRB- these figures can change and , therefore , the non-guaranteed length of coverage can change -RRB- . There 's also what 's called a Guaranteed Universal Life insurance policy -LRB- GUL -RRB- . These programs can create a level premium and death benefit guaranteed to a specific age -LRB- all the way up to age 121 with most carriers to guarantee the death benefit for life -RRB- . What this does is allows you to keep the premiums to its lowest levels and maximize the death benefit rather than placing the focus on the build-up of cash value , which is a common reason why many people buy whole life insurance . There are other moving parts in a universal life insurance policy , but this provides a brief overview .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your life insurance coverage needs , including quotes and policy comparisons , and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
There are several difference between Whole Life and Term Life Insurance . Put very simply , here are some : 1 -RRB- Term life insurance lasts for a `` term '' ; Whole life lasts for one 's `` whole life '' . These both depend on payments to last that long . 2 -RRB- Term life insurance does not have cash value ; Whole life insurance has cash value . Again , how the policy and payments are set up will determine the amount of cash value . 3 -RRB- Term life insurance only protects against death ; Whole life has options to use the policy while alive . There are some Term policies that now offer `` living options '' , as well ; however , Whole Life offers even more options than those .
This debate has been going on for the last century . In theory , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having health insurance ? And , in theory , if everyone was in the insurance risk pool this would be the best way to spread health care costs equally . By the same token , how could anyone be opposed to everyone having good and ample food & water , and everyone needs housing , and everyone needs utilities for their housing , and everyone needs transportation and there is a long list of other needs that we all have . The real question is can a society afford universal health insurance and thus universal health care in the sense that most Americans have become accustomed to getting it ? When you start looking at the economics of health care this becomes much more problematic . Health care is different from most services we consume in that it creates its own growing demand . Who does n't want to live longer , and live healthier during that longer life ? And , as you have probably noticed , we have a continually growing list of parts we can replace , once deadly illnesses we can now manage or cure , and treatments that just improve your `` quality of life '' . All this comes with a price tag and the price just keeps going up . I was born in 1957 for a cost of $ 400 , my son was born in 1987 for a cost of $ 4000 , and today a normal childbirth is easily $ 8000 + . As best as I can tell , babies are born the same way today as they were in 1957 but the cost has far outpaced general inflation levels in the economy as a whole over that time period . The painful reality is that providing universal healthcare in a modern society -LRB- e , g , - North America , Europe -RRB- has not been accomplished without rationing of healthcare services -LRB- however it might be disguised -RRB- . For instance , we have more MRI scanners in Memphis , TN than in all of Canada -LRB- a nation often cited as an example of where universal health insurance is a success -RRB- . Tests that get ordered and conducted on the same day here can have waiting times of months up there . There really is no definitive answer to your question . But it does highlight the gap between theory and reality when trying to address providing health insurance to a population .
Whole Life and Universal Life are the two main types of permanent insurance coverage -LRB- there are sub-categories with in that - e.g. guaranteed universal life , current assumption universal life , indexed universal life , participating whole life , non-participating whole life , and others -RRB- . Permanent life insurance , in general , is designed to provide coverage for the rest of the insured 's life and build cash value . Universal life insurance features a flexible premium structure It 's , in short , a blend between term life insurance and whole life insurance . A universal life policy will guarantee the maximum death benefit for the lowest possible premium -LRB- making it much less expensive than a whole life policy with the same death benefit -RRB- . Like with whole life insurance , universal life will build cash value , although it will generally not accumulate as much cash value over the life of the policy as a comparable whole life policy it is essentially term insurance to age 121 , with the emphasis on a larger death benefit instead of greater cash value for the premium that you are paying . Universal life is ideal for anyone who wants to maximize the death benefit and is n't worried about building cash value . You can guarantee benefits up to age 121 -LRB- with most companies -RRB- - these policies can be structured to dial down the death benefit to a specific age as well -LRB- e.g. to age 90 , 95 , 100 , 105 , etc. -RRB- , which can reduce your premium by a good margin . Whole life insurance is a great vehicle for planning for the future . The premiums and death benefit remain fixed and guaranteed for life while the policy can build cash value at a great rate - this structure is known as a non-participating whole life policy . The other type is called participating whole life policy . Participating WL policies can pay out dividends which can be used in several ways : 1 -RRB- Decrease the premium - the premium would eventually hit $ 0 at some point and the policy would , in essence , be self-sustaining meaning the dividend is equal to or greater than the premium for the program -LRB- if greater , the difference can be used to increase the cash value or increase the death benefit -RRB- 2 -RRB- Purchasing paid-up additions - these additions increase the face amount of the policy 3 -RRB- Increase the cash value at a faster rate While whole life has many advantages , it is also the most expensive form of life insurance . Whole life features level premiums and death benefits and builds cash value at a faster rate than Universal life policies - the trade off between is that to increase the cash value faster , the premiums will be substantially higher -LRB- can often be 2-3x the premiums of guaranteed universal life policies on many occasions -RRB- . Please note , regardless of the permanent coverage type , the carrier takes back the cash value upon the death of the insured , and pays out the death benefit proceeds . Therefore , guaranteed Universal life policies allow you to maximize your death benefit and minimize your premium dollars that you pay for the coverage . I hope the information is helpful - please feel free to contact me for assistance with your coverage and if you have any other questions . Thanks very much .
A universal life policy gives you flexibility that isnt available in other permanent policies . You can alter the premium . This is because the universal life policy transfers the responsibility for providing sufficient reserves to keep the policy in force from the company to you . Many companies provide a separate fund for their universal life policies but it is your premium deposits that determine how long the coverage will last . If you dont deposit sufficient premium dollars in the plan it will terminate .
It is always tempting to jump on the lowest cost life insurance available - and that is generally term life insurance . The payout on term insurance is less than 2 % . All too often , I meet people that have had a string of term policies throughout their life and see the premiums increase dramatically as they age to the point where they can no longer afford any term coverage . This could be solved with the purchase of a universal life policy . Universal life insurance can last your entire lifetime without having to re-qualify . You never know when you will have a life-changing accident or health issue that can make qualifying for a new policy difficult -LRB- causing prohibitively expensive premiums -RRB- or even a `` decline '' . Purchasing a universal life policy when you are relatively young can provide the necessary , guaranteed lifetime coverage at a low monthly premium and give your family a tax free death benefit upon your passing . Under the category of `` Universal Life '' is Indexed Universal Life which can have significant advantages for folks looking to build up a cash value inside the policy that can help pay for college and even offer an additional income stream during retirement . Life insurance and the type you purchase always comes down to the needs of the individual and their family . Consulting a qualified life insurance professional to determine which type best suits your situation is important .
There are many choices of life insurance available to you . The main stream life insurance products are term life , universal life , variable life and whole life . Each one has a specific purpose . Term life insurance is meant to coverage a specific period of time . The common terms are 1-5-10-15-20-25-30-35 years . This means the rate or premium you purchase is guaranteed level for that period of time regardless of change in health , life style or occupation . Term life is commonly used for younger people starting out in life , covering a large debt , life a mortgage on a home or business debt , or covering for a young child 's education . term life insurance allows for the largest face amount for the smallest premium payments . Universal life and variable life are permanent life insurance solutions that build cash value . Typically the premiums are more expensive and the face amounts are less because part of the premium is going into a cash value fund that can be invested with numerous options . The cash value can later be used for retirement , college funds , critical or chronic illness or even to purchase a large asset like a home . The universal and variable options are typically more aggressive with the cash value funds . The last option , whole life insurance , is very similar to the previous universal life insurance options . However , the cash value funds are typically a fixed percentage of growth . Whole life as it 's name suggests is primarily meant to cover you for your entire life . I recommend using an experienced independent life insurance broker with numerous carriers to shop the market and find you the best product at the best price for your unique situation . Good luck .
Term life insurance has a definitive ending . If you purchase 20 year term insurance it will end in 20 years . Other types of life insurance include Universal Life , Indexed Universal Life and Whole Life and each of these would be considered a type of permanent life insurance . Universal Life insurance can last your entire life if structured correctly . Universal Life can have a flexible premium which will allow the excess of premium above the actual cost of insurance to be credited to the cash value of the policy . Interest is credited to the cash value each month , adding to the cash value , once policy expenses are taken out . The interest percentage is set by the insurance company . Using the same flexible premium concept , when you determine the amount of interest to be credited to the policy by referencing a financial index such as the S&P 500 , it is an Indexed Universal Life -LRB- IUL -RRB- policy . No money is actually invested in the referenced stock market . The IUL can be designed to build up a large cash value over the years and that cash value grows tax deferred . If you need cash along the way , you can get a loan against your policy and use it for your own needs . Many people use an IUL to build cash value for college expenses or to supplement their retirement income . Whole Life insurance policies generally offer fixed premiums . In a participating whole life policy , the cash value inside the policy increases as the insurance company provides dividends based on the overall return on its investments . Earnings beyond those required to cover policy expenses go to the policy 's cash reserve from which you can borrow against during life 's journey or to supplement retirement income .
When you buy universal life insurance , you have the choice to put in a higher premium than is required for your policy to last to a certain age . If you add more premium , your cash value may build more quickly , or your universal life policy may last more years . The target premium is usually the required premium for the policy to last a set number of years .
end question
